The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Power of Darkness, by Leo Tolstoy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Power of Darkness

Author: Leo Tolstoy

Translator: Louise Maude
            Aylmer Maude

Release Date: September 22, 2008 [EBook #26661]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POWER OF DARKNESS ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  [ Transcriber's Note:
    This e-book belongs to Tolstoy's Plays (Complete Edition). The
    front matter, including the table of contents, can be found in
    e-book #26660; it lists the other plays in the collection.

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible; changes (corrections of spelling and punctuation) made to
    the original text are listed at the end of this file.
  ]




                         THE POWER OF DARKNESS

                                   OR

                  IF A CLAW IS CAUGHT THE BIRD IS LOST

                          A DRAMA IN FIVE ACTS

                                 (1886)




CHARACTERS


PETER IGNÁTITCH. A well-to-do peasant, 42 years old, married for the
second time, and sickly.

ANÍSYA. His wife, 32 years old, fond of dress.

AKOULÍNA. Peter's daughter by his first marriage, 16 years old, hard of
hearing, mentally undeveloped.

NAN (ANNA PETRÓVNA). His daughter by his second marriage, 10 years old.

NIKÍTA. Their labourer, 26 years old, fond of dress.

AKÍM. Nikíta's father, 50 years old, a plain-looking, God-fearing
peasant.

MATRYÓNA. His wife and Nikíta's mother, 50 years old.

MARÍNA. An orphan girl, 22 years old.

MARTHA. Peter's sister.

MÍTRITCH. An old labourer, ex-soldier.

SIMON. Marína's husband.

BRIDEGROOM. Engaged to Akoulína.

IVÁN. His father.

A NEIGHBOUR.

FIRST GIRL.

SECOND GIRL.

POLICE OFFICER.

DRIVER.

BEST-MAN.

MATCHMAKER.

VILLAGE ELDER.

VISITORS, WOMEN, GIRLS, AND PEOPLE come to see the wedding.

N.B.--The 'oven' mentioned is the usual large, brick, Russian
baking-oven. The top of it outside is flat, so that more than one
person can lie on it.




                         THE POWER OF DARKNESS




ACT I

    The Act takes place in autumn in a large village. The Scene
    represents Peter's roomy hut. Peter is sitting on a wooden bench,
    mending a horse-collar. Anísya and Akoulína are spinning, and
    singing a part-song.


PETER [looking out of the window] The horses have got loose again. If we
don't look out they'll be killing the colt. Nikíta! Hey, Nikíta! Is the
fellow deaf? [Listens. To the women] Shut up, one can't hear anything.

NIKÍTA [from outside] What?

PETER. Drive the horses in.

NIKÍTA. We'll drive 'em in. All in good time.

PETER [shaking his head] Ah, these labourers! If I were well, I'd not
keep one on no account. There's nothing but bother with 'em. [Rises and
sits down again] Nikíta!... It's no good shouting. One of you'd better
go. Go, Akoúl, drive 'em in.

AKOULÍNA. What? The horses?

PETER. What else?

AKOULÍNA. All right. [Exit].

PETER. Ah, but he's a loafer, that lad ... no good at all. Won't stir a
finger if he can help it.

ANÍSYA. You're so mighty brisk yourself. When you're not sprawling on
the top of the oven you're squatting on the bench. To goad others to
work is all you're fit for.

PETER. If one weren't to goad you on a bit, one'd have no roof left
over one's head before the year's out. Oh what people!

ANÍSYA. You go shoving a dozen jobs on to one's shoulders, and then do
nothing but scold. It's easy to lie on the oven and give orders.

PETER [sighing] Oh, if 'twere not for this sickness that's got hold of
me, I'd not keep him on another day.

AKOULÍNA [off the scene] Gee up, gee, woo. [A colt neighs, the stamping
of horses' feet and the creaking of the gate are heard].

PETER. Bragging, that's what he's good at. I'd like to sack him, I would
indeed.

ANÍSYA [mimicking him] "Like to sack him." You buckle to yourself, and
then talk.

AKOULÍNA [enters] It's all I could do to drive 'em in. That piebald
always will ...

PETER. And where's Nikíta?

AKOULÍNA. Where's Nikíta? Why, standing out there in the street.

PETER. What's he standing there for?

AKOULÍNA. What's he standing there for? He stands there jabbering.

PETER. One can't get any sense out of her! Who's he jabbering with?

AKOULÍNA [does not hear] Eh, what?

    Peter waves her off. She sits down to her spinning.

NAN [running in to her mother] Nikíta's father and mother have come.
They're going to take him away. It's true!

ANÍSYA. Nonsense!

NAN. Yes. Blest if they're not! [Laughing] I was just going by, and
Nikíta, he says, "Good-bye, Anna Petróvna," he says, "you must come and
dance at my wedding. I'm leaving you," he says, and laughs.

ANÍSYA [to her husband] There now. Much he cares. You see, he wants to
leave of himself. "Sack him" indeed!

PETER. Well, let him go. Just as if I couldn't find somebody else.

ANÍSYA. And what about the money he's had in advance?

    Nan stands listening at the door for awhile, and then exit.

PETER [frowning] The money? Well, he can work it off in summer, anyhow.

ANÍSYA. Well, of course you'll be glad if he goes and you've not got to
feed him. It's only me as'll have to work like a horse all the winter.
That lass of yours isn't over fond of work either. And you'll be lying
up on the oven. I know you.

PETER. What's the good of wearing out one's tongue before one has the
hang of the matter?

ANÍSYA. The yard's full of cattle. You've not sold the cow, and have
kept all the sheep for the winter: feeding and watering 'em alone takes
all one's time, and you want to sack the labourer. But I tell you
straight, I'm not going to do a man's work! I'll go and lie on the top
of the oven same as you, and let everything go to pot! You may do what
you like.

PETER [to Akoulína] Go and see about the feeding, will you? it's time.

AKOULÍNA. The feeding? All right. [Puts on a coat and takes a rope].

ANÍSYA. I'm not going to work for you. You go and work yourself. I've
had enough of it, so there!

PETER. That'll do. What are you raving about? Like a sheep with the
staggers!

ANÍSYA. You're a crazy cur, you are! One gets neither work nor pleasure
from you. Eating your fill, that's all you do, you palsied cur, you!

PETER [spits and puts on coat] Faugh! The Lord have mercy! I'd better go
myself and see what's up. [Exit].

ANÍSYA [after him] Scurvy long-nosed devil!

AKOULÍNA. What are you swearing at dad for?

ANÍSYA. Hold your noise, you idiot!

AKOULÍNA [going to the door] I know why you're swearing at him. You're
an idiot yourself, you bitch. I'm not afraid of you.

ANÍSYA. What do you mean? [Jumps up and looks round for something to hit
her with] Mind, or I'll give you one with the poker.

AKOULÍNA [opening the door] Bitch! devil! that's what you are! Devil!
bitch! bitch! devil! [Runs off].

ANÍSYA [ponders] "Come and dance at my wedding!" What new plan is this?
Marry? Mind, Nikíta, if that's your intention, I'll go and ... No, I
can't live without him. I won't let him go.

NIKÍTA [enters, looks round, and seeing Anísya alone approaches quickly.
In a low tone] Here's a go; I'm in a regular fix! That governor of mine
wants to take me away,--tells me I'm to come home. Says quite straight
I'm to marry and live at home.

ANÍSYA. Well, go and marry! What's that to me?

NIKÍTA. Is that it? Why, here am I reckoning how best to consider
matters, and just hear her! She tells me to go and marry. Why's that?
[Winking] Has she forgotten?

ANÍSYA. Yes, go and marry! What do I care?

NIKÍTA. What are you spitting for? Just see, she won't even let me
stroke her.... What's the matter?

ANÍSYA. This! That you want to play me false.... If you do,--why, I
don't want you either. So now you know!

NIKÍTA. That'll do, Anísya. Do you think I'll forget you? Never while I
live! I'll not play you false, that's flat. I've been thinking that
supposing they do go and make me marry, I'd still come back to you. If
only he don't make me live at home.

ANÍSYA. Much need I'll have of you, once you're married.

NIKÍTA. There's a go now. How is it possible to go against one's
father's will?

ANÍSYA. Yes, I daresay, shove it all on your father. You know it's your
own doing. You've long been plotting with that slut of yours, Marína.
It's she has put you up to it. She didn't come here for nothing t'other
day.

NIKÍTA. Marína? What's she to me? Much I care about her!... Plenty of
them buzzing around.

ANÍSYA. Then what has made your father come here? It's you have told him
to. You've gone and deceived me. [Cries].

NIKÍTA. Anísya, do you believe in a God or not? I never so much as
dreamt of it. I know nothing at all about it. I never even dreamt of
it--that's flat! My old dad has got it all out of his own pate.

ANÍSYA. If you don't wish it yourself who can force you? He can't drive
you like an ass.

NIKÍTA. Well, I reckon it's not possible to go against one's parent. But
it's not by my wish.

ANÍSYA. Don't you budge, that's all about it!

NIKÍTA. There was a fellow wouldn't budge, and the village elder gave
him such a hiding.... That's what it might come to! I've no great wish
for that sort of thing. They say it touches one up....

ANÍSYA. Shut up with your nonsense. Nikíta, listen to me: if you marry
that Marína I don't know what I won't do to myself.... I shall lay hands
on myself! I have sinned, I have gone against the law, but I can't go
back now. If you go away I'll ...

NIKÍTA. Why should I go? Had I wanted to go--I should have gone long
ago. There was Iván Semyónitch t'other day--offered me a place as his
coachman.... Only fancy what a life that would have been! But I did not
go. Because, I reckon, I am good enough for any one. Now if you did not
love me it would be a different matter.

ANÍSYA. Yes, and that's what you should remember. My old man will die
one of these fine days, I'm thinking; then we could cover our sin, make
it all right and lawful, and then you'll be master here.

NIKÍTA. Where's the good of making plans? What do I care? I work as hard
as if I were doing it for myself. My master loves me, and his missus
loves me. And if the wenches run after me, it's not my fault, that's
flat.

ANÍSYA. And you'll love me?

NIKÍTA [embracing her] There, as you have ever been in my heart ...

MATRYÓNA [enters, and crosses herself a long time before the icón.
Nikíta and Anísya step apart] What I saw I didn't perceive, what I heard
I didn't hearken to. Playing with the lass, eh? Well,--even a calf will
play. Why shouldn't one have some fun when one's young? But your master
is out in the yard a-calling you, sonnie.

NIKÍTA. I only came to get the axe.

MATRYÓNA. I know, sonnie, I know; them sort of axes are mostly to be
found where the women are.

NIKÍTA [stooping to pick up axe] I say, mother, is it true you want me
to marry? As I reckon, that's quite unnecessary. Besides, I've got no
wish that way.

MATRYÓNA. Eh, honey! why should you marry? Go on as you are. It's all
the old man. You'd better go, sonnie, we can talk these matters over
without you.

NIKÍTA. It's a queer go! One moment I'm to be married, the next, not. I
can't make head or tail of it. [Exit].

ANÍSYA. What's it all about then? Do you really wish him to get married?

MATRYÓNA. Eh, why should he marry, my jewel? It's all nonsense, all my
old man's drivel. "Marry, marry." But he's reckoning without his host.
You know the saying, "From oats and hay, why should horses stray?" When
you've enough and to spare, why look elsewhere? And so in this case.
[Winks] Don't I see which way the wind blows?

ANÍSYA. Where's the good of my pretending to you, Mother Matryóna? You
know all about it. I have sinned. I love your son.

MATRYÓNA. Dear me, here's news! D'you think Mother Matryóna didn't know?
Eh, lassie,--Mother Matryóna's been ground, and ground again, ground
fine! This much I can tell you, my jewel: Mother Matryóna can see
through a brick wall three feet thick. I know it all, my jewel! I know
what young wives need sleeping draughts for, so I've brought some along.
[Unties a knot in her handkerchief and brings out paper-packets] As much
as is wanted, I see, and what's not wanted I neither see nor perceive!
There! Mother Matryóna has also been young. I had to know a thing or two
to live with my old fool. I know seventy-and-seven dodges. But I see
your old man's quite seedy, quite seedy! How's one to live with such as
him? Why, if you pricked him with a hay-fork it wouldn't fetch blood.
See if you don't bury him before the spring. Then you'll need some one
in the house. Well, what's wrong with my son? He'll do as well as
another. Then where's the advantage of my taking him away from a good
place? Am I my child's enemy?

ANÍSYA. Oh, if only he does not go away.

MATRYÓNA. He won't go away, birdie. It's all nonsense. You know my old
man. His wits are always wool-gathering; yet sometimes he takes a thing
into his pate, and it's as if it were wedged in, you can't knock it out
with a hammer.

ANÍSYA. And what started this business?

MATRYÓNA. Well, you see, my jewel, you yourself know what a fellow with
women the lad is,--and he's handsome too, though I say it as shouldn't.
Well, you know, he was living at the railway, and they had an orphan
wench there to cook for them. Well, that same wench took to running
after him.

ANÍSYA. Marína?

MATRYÓNA. Yes, the plague seize her! Whether anything happened or not,
anyhow something got to my old man's ears. Maybe he heard from the
neighbours, maybe she's been and blabbed ...

ANÍSYA. Well, she is a bold hussy!

MATRYÓNA. So my old man--the old blockhead--off he goes: "Marry, marry,"
he says, "he must marry her and cover the sin," he says. "We must take
the lad home," he says, "and he shall marry," he says. Well, I did my
best to make him change his mind, but, dear me, no. So, all right,
thinks I,--I'll try another dodge. One always has to entice them fools
in this way, just pretend to be of their mind, and when it comes to the
point one goes and turns it all one's own way. You know, a woman has
time to think seventy-and-seven thoughts while falling off the oven, so
how's such as he to see through it? "Well, yes," says I, "it would be a
good job,--only we must consider well beforehand. Why not go and see our
son, and talk it over with Peter Ignátitch and hear what he has to say?"
So here we are.

ANÍSYA. Oh dear, oh dear, how will it all end? Supposing his father just
orders him to marry her?

MATRYÓNA. Orders, indeed. Chuck his orders to the dogs! Don't you worry;
that affair will never come off. I'll go to your old man myself, and
sift and strain this matter clear--there will be none of it left. I have
come here only for the look of the thing. A very likely thing! Here's my
son living in happiness and expecting happiness, and I'll go and match
him with a slut! No fear, I'm not a fool!

ANÍSYA. And she--this Marína--came dangling after him here! Mother,
would you believe, when they said he was going to marry, it was as if a
knife had gone right through my heart. I thought he cared for her.

MATRYÓNA. Oh, my jewel! Why, you don't think him such a fool, that he
should go and care for a homeless baggage like that? Nikíta is a
sensible fellow, you see. He knows whom to love. So don't you go and
fret, my jewel. We'll not take him away, and we won't marry him. No,
we'll let him stay on, if you'll only oblige us with a little money.

ANÍSYA. All I know is, that I could not live if Nikíta went away.

MATRYÓNA. Naturally, when one's young it's no easy matter! You, a wench
in full bloom, to be living with the dregs of a man like that husband of
yours.

ANÍSYA. Mother Matryóna, would you believe it? I'm that sick of him,
that sick of this long-nosed cur of mine, I can hardly bear to look at
him.

MATRYÓNA. Yes, I see, it's one of them cases. Just look here, [looks
round and whispers] I've been to see that old man, you know--he's given
me simples of two kinds. This, you see, is a sleeping draught. "Just
give him one of these powders," he says, "and he'll sleep so sound you
might jump on him!" And this here, "This is that kind of simple," he
says, "that if you give one some of it to drink it has no smell
whatever, but its strength is very great. There are seven doses here, a
pinch at a time. Give him seven pinches," he says, "and she won't have
far to look for freedom," he says.

ANÍSYA. O-o-oh! What's that?

MATRYÓNA. "No sign whatever," he says. He's taken a rouble for it.
"Can't sell it for less," he says. Because it's no easy matter to get
'em, you know. I paid him, dearie, out of my own money. If she takes
them, thinks I, it's all right; if she don't, I can let old Michael's
daughter have them.

ANÍSYA. O-o-oh! But mayn't some evil come of them? I'm frightened!

MATRYÓNA. What evil, my jewel? If your old man was hale and hearty,
'twould be a different matter, but he's neither alive nor dead as it is.
He's not for this world. Such things often happen.

ANÍSYA. O-o-oh, my poor head! I'm afeared, Mother Matryóna, lest some
evil come of them. No. That won't do.

MATRYÓNA. Just as you like. I might even return them to him.

ANÍSYA. And are they to be used in the same way as the others? Mixed in
water?

MATRYÓNA. Better in tea, he says. "You can't notice anything," he says,
"no smell nor nothing." He's a cute old fellow too.

  [Illustration: THE POWER OF DARKNESS. ACT I.

  MATRYÓNA GIVES ANÍSYA THE POWDERS.]

ANÍSYA. [taking the powder] O-oh, my poor head! Could I have ever
thought of such a thing if my life were not a very hell?

MATRYÓNA. You'll not forget that rouble? I promised to take it to the
old man. He's had some trouble, too.

ANÍSYA. Of course? [Goes to her box and hides the powders].

MATRYÓNA. And now, my jewel, keep it as close as you can, so that no one
should find it out. Heaven defend that it should happen, but _if_ any
one notices it, tell 'em it's for the black-beetles. [Takes the rouble]
It's also used for beetles. [Stops short].

    Enter Akím, who crosses himself in front of the icón, and then
    Peter, who sits down.

PETER. Well then, how's it to be, Daddy Akím?

AKÍM. As it's best, Peter Ignátitch, as it's best ... I mean--as it's
best. 'Cos why? I'm afeared of what d'you call 'ems, some tomfoolery,
you know. I'd like to, what d'you call it ... to start, you know, start
the lad honest, I mean. But supposing you'd rather, what d'you call it,
we might, I mean, what's name? As it's best ...

PETER. All right. All right. Sit down and let's talk it over. [Akím sits
down] Well then, what's it all about? You want him to marry?

MATRYÓNA. As to marrying, he might bide a while, Peter Ignátitch. You
know our poverty, Peter Ignátitch. What's he to marry on? We've hardly
enough to eat ourselves. How can he marry then?...

PETER. You must consider what will be best.

MATRYÓNA. Where's the hurry for him to get married? Marriage is not that
sort of thing, it's not like ripe raspberries that drop off if not
picked in time.

PETER. If he were to get married, 'twould be a good thing in a way.

AKÍM. We'd like to ... what d'you call it? 'Cos why, you see. I've what
d'you call it ... a job. I mean, I've found a paying job in town, you
know.

MATRYÓNA. And a fine job too--cleaning out cesspools. The other day when
he came home, I could do nothing but spew and spew. Faugh!

AKÍM. It's true, at first it does seem what d'you call it ... knocks one
clean over, you know,--the smell, I mean. But one gets used to it, and
then it's nothing, no worse than malt grain, and then it's, what d'you
call it, ... pays, pays, I mean. And as to the smell being, what d'you
call it, it's not for the likes of us to complain. And one changes one's
clothes. So we'd like to take what's his name ... Nikíta I mean, home.
Let him manage things at home while I, what d'you call it,--earn
something in town.

PETER. You want to keep your son at home? Yes, that would be well: but
how about the money he has had in advance?

AKÍM. That's it, that's it! It's just as you say, Ignátitch, it's just
what d'you call it. 'Cos why? If you go into service, it's as good as if
you had sold yourself, they say. That will be all right. I mean he may
stay and serve his time, only he must, what d'you call it, get married.
I mean--so: you let him off for a little while, that he may, what d'you
call it?

PETER. Yes, we could manage that.

MATRYÓNA. Ah, but it's not yet settled between ourselves, Peter
Ignátitch. I'll speak to you as I would before God, and you may judge
between my old man and me. He goes on harping on that marriage. But just
ask--who it is he wants him to marry. If it were a girl of the right
sort now-- I am not my child's enemy, but the wench is not honest.

AKÍM. No, that's wrong! Wrong, I say. 'Cos why? She, that same
girl--it's my son as has offended, offended the girl I mean.

PETER. How offended?

AKÍM. That's how. She's what d'you call it, with him, with my son,
Nikíta. With Nikíta, what d'you call it, I mean.

MATRYÓNA. You wait a bit, my tongue runs smoother--let me tell it. You
know, this lad of ours lived at the railway before he came to you. There
was a girl there as kept dangling after him. A girl of no account, you
know, her name's Marína. She used to cook for the men. So now this same
girl accuses our son, Nikíta, that he, so to say, deceived her.

PETER. Well, there's nothing good in that.

MATRYÓNA. But she's no honest girl herself; she runs after the fellows
like a common slut.

AKÍM. There you are again, old woman, and it's not at all what d'you
call it, it's all not what d'you call it, I mean ...

MATRYÓNA. There now, that's all the sense one gets from my old
owl--"what d'you call it, what d'you call it," and he doesn't know
himself what he means. Peter Ignátitch, don't listen to me, but go
yourself and ask any one you like about the girl, everybody will say the
same. She's just a homeless good-for-nothing.

PETER. You know, Daddy Akím, if that's how things are, there's no reason
for him to marry her. A daughter-in-law's not like a shoe, you can't
kick her off.

AKÍM [excitedly] It's false, old woman, it's what d'you call it, false;
I mean, about the girl; false! 'Cos why? The lass is a good lass, a very
good lass, you know. I'm sorry, sorry for the lassie, I mean.

MATRYÓNA. It's an old saying: "For the wide world old Miriam grieves,
and at home without bread her children she leaves." He's sorry for the
girl, but not sorry for his own son! Sling her round your neck and carry
her about with you! That's enough of such empty cackle!

AKÍM. No, it's not empty.

MATRYÓNA. There, don't interrupt, let me have my say.

AKÍM [interrupts] No, not empty! I mean, you twist things your own way,
about the lass or about yourself. Twist them, I mean, to make it better
for yourself; but God, what d'you call it, turns them His way. That's
how it is.

MATRYÓNA. Eh! One only wears out one's tongue with you.

AKÍM. The lass is hard-working and spruce, and keeps everything round
herself ... what d'you call it. And in our poverty, you know, it's a
pair of hands, I mean; and the wedding needn't cost much. But the chief
thing's the offence, the offence to the lass, and she's a what d'you
call it, an orphan, you know; that's what she is, and there's the
offence.

MATRYÓNA. Eh! they'll all tell you a tale of that sort ...

ANÍSYA. Daddy Akím, you'd better listen to us women; we can tell you a
thing or two.

AKÍM. And God, how about God? Isn't she a human being, the lass? A what
d'you call it,--also a human being I mean, before God. And how do you
look at it?

MATRYÓNA. Eh!... started off again?...

PETER. Wait a bit, Daddy Akím. One can't believe all these girls say,
either. The lad's alive, and not far away; send for him, and find out
straight from him if it's true. He won't wish to lose his soul. Go and
call the fellow, [Anísya rises] and tell him his father wants him. [Exit
Anísya].

MATRYÓNA. That's right, dear friend; you've cleared the way clean, as
with water. Yes, let the lad speak for himself. Nowadays, you know,
they'll not let you force a son to marry; one must first of all ask the
lad. He'll never consent to marry her and disgrace himself, not for all
the world. To my thinking, it's best he should go on living with you and
serving you as his master. And we need not take him home for the summer
either; we can hire a help. If you would only give us ten roubles now,
we'll let him stay on.

PETER. All in good time. First let us settle one thing before we start
another.

AKÍM. You see, Peter Ignátitch, I speak. 'Cos why? you know how it
happens. We try to fix things up as seems best for ourselves, you know;
and as to God, we what d'you call it, we forget Him. We think it's best
so, turn it our own way, and lo! we've got into a fix, you know. We
think it will be best, I mean; and lo! it turns out much worse--without
God, I mean.

PETER. Of course one must not forget God.

AKÍM. It turns out worse! But when it's the right way--God's way--it
what d'you call it, it gives one joy; seems pleasant, I mean. So I
reckon, you see, get him, the lad, I mean, get him to marry her, to keep
him from sin, I mean, and let him what d'you call it at home, as it's
lawful, I mean, while I go and get the job in town. The work is of the
right sort--it's payin', I mean. And in God's sight it's what d'you call
it--it's best, I mean. Ain't she an orphan? Here, for example, a year
ago some fellows went and took timber from the steward,--thought they'd
do the steward, you know. Yes, they did the steward, but they couldn't
what d'you call it--do God, I mean. Well, and so ...

    Enter Nikíta and Nan.

NIKÍTA. You called me? [Sits down and takes out his tobacco-pouch].

PETER [in a low, reproachful voice] What are you thinking about--have
you no manners? Your father is going to speak to you, and you sit down
and fool about with tobacco. Come, get up!

    Nikíta rises, leans carelessly with his elbow on the table, and
    smiles.

AKÍM. It seems there's a complaint, you know, about you, Nikíta--a
complaint, I mean, a complaint.

NIKÍTA. Who's been complaining?

AKÍM. Complaining? It's a maid, an orphan maid, complaining, I mean.
It's her, you know--a complaint against you, from Marína, I mean.

NIKÍTA [laughs] Well, that's a good one. What's the complaint? And who's
told you--she herself?

AKÍM. It's I am asking you, and you must now, what d'you call it, give
me an answer. Have you got mixed up with the lass, I mean--mixed up, you
know?

NIKÍTA. I don't know what you mean. What's up?

AKÍM. Foolin', I mean, what d'you call it? foolin'. Have you been
foolin' with her, I mean?

NIKÍTA. Never mind what's been! Of course one does have some fun with a
cook now and then to while away the time. One plays the concertina and
gets her to dance. What of that?

PETER. Don't shuffle, Nikíta, but answer your father straight out.

AKÍM [solemnly] You can hide it from men but not from God, Nikíta. You,
what d'you call it--think, I mean, and don't tell lies. She's an orphan;
so, you see, any one is free to insult her. An orphan, you see. So you
should say what's rightest.

NIKÍTA. But what if I have nothing to say? I have told you
everything--because there isn't anything to tell, that's flat! [Getting
excited] She can go and say anything about me, same as if she was
speaking of one as is dead. Why don't she say anything about Fédka
Mikíshin? Besides, how's this, that one mayn't even have a bit of fun
nowadays? And as for her, well, she's free to say anything she likes.

AKÍM. Ah, Nikíta, mind! A lie will out. Did anything happen?

NIKÍTA [aside] How he sticks to it; it's too bad. [To Akím] I tell you,
I know nothing more. There's been nothing between us. [Angrily] By God!
and may I never leave this spot [crosses himself] if I know anything
about it. [Silence. Then still more excitedly] Why! have you been
thinking of getting me to marry her? What do you mean by it?--it's a
confounded shame. Besides, nowadays you've got no such rights as to
force a fellow to marry. That's plain enough. Besides, haven't I sworn I
know nothing about it?

MATRYÓNA [to her husband] There now, that's just like your silly pate,
to believe all they tell you. He's gone and put the lad to shame all for
nothing. The best thing is to let him live as he is living, with his
master. His master will help us in our present need, and give us ten
roubles, and when the time comes ...

PETER. Well, Daddy Akím, how's it to be?

AKÍM [looks at his son, clicking his tongue disapprovingly] Mind,
Nikíta, the tears of one that's been wronged never, what d'you call
it--never fall beside the mark but always on, what's name--the head of
the man as did the wrong. So mind, don't what d'you call it.

NIKÍTA [sits down] What's there to mind? mind yourself.

NAN [aside] I must run and tell mother. [Exit].

MATRYÓNA [to Peter] That's always the way with this old mumbler of mine,
Peter Ignátitch. Once he's got anything wedged in his pate there's no
knocking it out. We've gone and troubled you all for nothing. The lad
can go on living as he has been. Keep him; he's your servant.

PETER. Well, Daddy Akím, what do you say?

AKÍM. Why, the lad's his own master, if only he what d'you call it.... I
only wish that, what d'you call it, I mean.

MATRYÓNA. You don't know yourself what you're jawing about. The lad
himself has no wish to leave. Besides, what do we want with him at home?
We can manage without him.

PETER. Only one thing, Daddy Akím--if you are thinking of taking him
back in summer, I don't want him here for the winter. If he is to stay
at all, it must be for the whole year.

MATRYÓNA. And it's for a year he'll bind himself. If we want help when
the press of work comes, we can hire help, and the lad shall remain with
you. Only give us ten roubles now....

PETER. Well then, is it to be for another year?

AKÍM. [sighing] Yes, it seems, it what d'you call it ... if it's so, I
mean, it seems that it must be what d'you call it.

MATRYÓNA. For a year, counting from St. Dimítry's day. We know you'll
pay him fair wages. But give us ten roubles now. Help us out of our
difficulties. [Gets up and bows to Peter].

    Enter Nan and Anísya. The latter sits down at one side.

PETER. Well, if that's settled we might step across to the inn and have
a drink. Come, Daddy Akím, what do you say to a glass of vódka?

AKÍM. No, I never drink that sort of thing.

PETER. Well, you'll have some tea?

AKÍM. Ah, tea! yes, I do sin that way. Yes, tea's the thing.

PETER. And the women will also have some tea. Come. And you, Nikíta, go
and drive the sheep in and clear away the straw.

NIKÍTA. All right. [Exeunt all but Nikíta. Nikíta lights a cigarette. It
grows darker] Just see how they bother one. Want a fellow to tell 'em
how he larks about with the wenches! It would take long to tell 'em all
those stories--"Marry her," he says. Marry them all! One would have a
good lot of wives! And what need have I to marry? Am as good as married
now! There's many a chap as envies me. Yet how strange it felt when I
crossed myself before the icón. It was just as if some one shoved me.
The whole web fell to pieces at once. They say it's frightening to swear
what's not true. That's all humbug. It's all talk, that is. It's simple
enough.

AKOULÍNA [enters with a rope, which she puts down. She takes off her
outdoor things and goes into closet] You might at least have got a
light.

NIKÍTA. What, to look at you? I can see you well enough without.

AKOULÍNA. Oh, bother you!

    Nan enters and whispers to Nikíta.

NAN. Nikíta, there's a person wants you. There is!

NIKÍTA. What person?

NAN. Marína from the railway; she's out there, round the corner.

NIKÍTA. Nonsense!

NAN. Blest if she isn't!

NIKÍTA. What does she want?

NAN. She wants you to come out. She says, "I only want to say a word to
Nikíta." I began asking, but she won't tell, but only says, "Is it true
he's leaving you?" And I say, "No, only his father wanted to take him
away and get him to marry, but he won't, and is going to stay with us
another year." And she says, "For goodness' sake send him out to me. I
must see him," she says, "I must say a word to him somehow." She's been
waiting a long time. Why don't you go?

NIKÍTA. Bother her! What should I go for?

NAN. She says, "If he don't come, I'll go into the hut to him." Blest if
she didn't say she'd come in!

NIKÍTA. Not likely. She'll wait a bit and then go away.

NAN. "Or is it," she says, "that they want him to marry Akoulína?"

    Re-enter Akoulína, passing near Nikíta to take her distaff.

AKOULÍNA. Marry whom to Akoulína?

NAN. Why, Nikíta.

AKOULÍNA. A likely thing! Who says it?

NIKÍTA [looks at her and laughs] It seems people do say it. Would you
marry me, Akoulína?

AKOULÍNA. Who, you? Perhaps I might have afore, but I won't now.

NIKÍTA. And why not now?

AKOULÍNA. 'Cos you wouldn't love me.

NIKÍTA. Why not?

AKOULÍNA. 'Cos you'd be forbidden to. [Laughs].

NIKÍTA. Who'd forbid it?

AKOULÍNA. Who? My step-mother. She does nothing but grumble, and is
always staring at you.

NIKÍTA [laughing] Just hear her! Ain't she cute?

AKOULÍNA. Who? Me? What's there to be cute about? Am I blind? She's been
rowing and rowing at dad all day. The fat-muzzled witch! [Goes into
closet].

NAN [looking out of the window] Look, Nikíta, she's coming! I'm blest if
she isn't! I'll go away. [Exit].

MARÍNA [enters] What are you doing with me?

NIKÍTA. Doing? I'm not doing anything.

MARÍNA. You mean to desert me.

NIKÍTA [gets up angrily] What does this look like, your coming here?

MARÍNA. Oh, Nikíta!

NIKÍTA. Well, you are strange! What have you come for?

MARÍNA. Nikíta!

NIKÍTA. That's my name. What do you want with Nikíta? Well, what next?
Go away, I tell you!

MARÍNA. I see, you do want to throw me over.

NIKÍTA. Well, and what's there to remember? You yourself don't know.
When you stood out there round the corner and sent Nan for me, and I
didn't come, wasn't it plain enough that you're not wanted? It seems
pretty simple. So there--go!

MARÍNA. Not wanted! So now I'm not wanted! I believed you when you said
you would love me. And now that you've ruined me, I'm not wanted.

NIKÍTA. Where's the good of talking? This is quite improper. You've been
telling tales to father. Now, do go away, will you?

MARÍNA. You know yourself I never loved any one but you. Whether you
married me or not, I'd not have been angry. I've done you no wrong, then
why have you left off caring for me? Why?

NIKÍTA. Where's the use of baying at the moon? You go away. Goodness me!
what a duffer!

MARÍNA. It's not that you deceived me when you promised to marry me that
hurts, but that you've left off loving. No, it's not that you've stopped
loving me either, but that you've changed me for another, that's what
hurts. I know who it is!

NIKÍTA [comes up to her viciously] Eh! what's the good of talking to the
likes of you, that won't listen to reason? Be off, or you'll drive me to
do something you'll be sorry for.

MARÍNA. What, will you strike me, then? Well then, strike me! What are
you turning away for? Ah, Nikíta!

NIKÍTA. Supposing some one came in. Of course, it's quite improper. And
what's the good of talking?

MARÍNA. So this is the end of it! What has been has flown. You want me
to forget it? Well then, Nikíta, listen. I kept my maiden honour as the
apple of my eye. You have ruined me for nothing, you have deceived me.
You have no pity on a fatherless and motherless girl! [Weeping] You have
deserted, you have killed me, but I bear you no malice. God forgive you!
If you find a better one you'll forget me, if a worse one you'll remember
me. Yes, you will remember, Nikíta! Good-bye, then, if it is to be. Oh,
how I loved you! Good-bye for the last time. [Takes his head in her
hands and tries to kiss him].

NIKÍTA [tossing his head back] I'm not going to talk with the likes of
you. If you won't go away I will, and you may stay here by yourself.

MARÍNA [screams] You are a brute. [In the doorway] God will give you no
joy. [Exit, crying].

AKOULÍNA [comes out of closet] You're a dog, Nikíta!

NIKÍTA. What's up?

AKOULÍNA. What a cry she gave! [Cries].

NIKÍTA. What's up with you?

AKOULÍNA. What's up? You've hurt her so. That's the way you'll hurt me
also. You're a dog. [Exit into closet].

    Silence.

NIKÍTA. Here's a fine muddle. I'm as sweet as honey on the lasses, but
when a fellow's sinned with 'em it's a bad look-out!


                                Curtain.




ACT II

    The scene represents the village street. To the left the outside of
    Peter's hut, built of logs, with a porch in the middle; to the right
    of the hut the gates and a corner of the yard buildings. Anísya is
    beating hemp in the street near the corner of the yard. Six months
    have elapsed since the First Act.


ANÍSYA [stops and listens] Mumbling something again. He's probably got
off the stove.

    Akoulína enters, carrying two pails on a yoke.

ANÍSYA. He's calling. You go and see what he wants, kicking up such a
row.

AKOULÍNA. Why don't you go?

ANÍSYA. Go, I tell you! [Exit Akoulína into hut] He's bothering me to
death. Won't let out where the money is, and that's all about it. He was
out in the passage the other day. He must have been hiding it there.
Now, I don't know myself where it is. Thank goodness he's afraid of
parting with it, so that at least it will stay in the house. If only I
could manage to find it. He hadn't it on him yesterday. Now I don't know
where it can be. He has quite worn the life out of me.

    Enter Akoulína, tying her kerchief over her head.

ANÍSYA. Where are you off to?

AKOULÍNA. Where? Why, he's told me to go for Aunt Martha. "Fetch my
sister," he says. "I am going to die," he says. "I have a word to say to
her."

ANÍSYA [aside] Asking for his sister? Oh my poor head! Sure he wants to
give it her. What shall I do? Oh! [To Akoulína] Don't go! Where are you
off to?

AKOULÍNA. To call Aunt.

ANÍSYA. Don't go I tell you, I'll go myself. You go and take the clothes
to the river to rinse. Else you'll not have finished by the evening.

AKOULÍNA. But he told me to go.

ANÍSYA. You go and do as you're bid. I tell you I'll fetch Martha
myself. Take the shirts off the fence.

AKOULÍNA. The shirts? But maybe you'll not go. He's given the order.

ANÍSYA. Didn't I say I'd go? Where's Nan?

AKOULÍNA. Nan? Minding the calves.

ANÍSYA. Send her here. I dare say they'll not run away. [Akoulína
collects the clothes, and exit].

ANÍSYA. If one doesn't go he'll scold. If one goes he'll give the money
to his sister. All my trouble will be wasted. I don't myself know what
I'm to do. My poor head's splitting. [Continues to work].

    Enter Matryóna, with a stick and a bundle, in outdoor clothes.

MATRYÓNA. May the Lord help you, honey.

ANÍSYA [looks round, stops working, and claps her hands with joy] Well,
I never expected this! Mother Matryóna, God has sent the right guest at
the right time.

MATRYÓNA. Well, how are things?

ANÍSYA. Ah, I'm driven well-nigh crazy. It's awful!

MATRYÓNA. Well, still alive, I hear?

ANÍSYA. Oh, don't talk about it. He doesn't live and doesn't die!

MATRYÓNA. But the money--has he given it to anybody?

ANÍSYA. He's just sending for his sister Martha--probably about the
money.

MATRYÓNA. Well, naturally! But hasn't he given it to any one else?

ANÍSYA. To no one. I watch like a hawk.

MATRYÓNA. And where is it?

ANÍSYA. He doesn't let out. And I can't find out in any way. He hides it
now here, now there, and I can't do anything because of Akoulína. Idiot
though she is, she keeps watch, and is always about. Oh my poor head!
I'm bothered to death.

MATRYÓNA. Oh, my jewel, if he gives the money to any one but you, you'll
never cease regretting it as long as you live! They'll turn you out of
house and home without anything. You've been worriting, and worriting
all your life with one you don't love, and will have to go a-begging
when you are a widow.

ANÍSYA. No need to tell me, mother. My heart's that weary, and I don't
know what to do. No one to get a bit of advice from. I told Nikíta, but
he's frightened of the job. The only thing he did was to tell me
yesterday it was hidden under the floor.

MATRYÓNA. Well, and did you look there?

ANÍSYA. I couldn't. The old man himself was in the room. I notice that
sometimes he carries it about on him, and sometimes he hides it.

MATRYÓNA. But you, my lass, must remember that if once he gives you the
slip there's no getting it right again! [Whispering] Well, and did you
give him the strong tea?

ANÍSYA. Oh! oh!... [About to answer, but sees neighbour and stops].

    The neighbour (a woman) passes the hut, and listens to a call from
    within.

NEIGHBOUR [to Anísya] I say, Anísya! Eh, Anísya! There's your old man
calling, I think.

ANÍSYA. That's the way he always coughs,--just as if he were screaming.
He's getting very bad.

NEIGHBOUR [approaches Matryóna] How do you do, granny? Have you come
far?

MATRYÓNA. Straight from home, dear. Come to see my son. Brought him
some shirts--can't help thinking of these things, you see, when it's
one's own child.

NEIGHBOUR. Yes, that's always so. [To Anísya] And I was thinking of
beginning to bleach the linen, but it is a bit early, no one has begun
yet.

ANÍSYA. Where's the hurry?

MATRYÓNA. Well, and has he had communion?

ANÍSYA. Oh dear yes, the priest was here yesterday.

NEIGHBOUR. I had a look at him yesterday. Dearie me! one wonders his
body and soul keep together. And, O Lord, the other day he seemed just
at his last gasp, so that they laid him under the holy icóns.[1] They
started lamenting and got ready to lay him out.

  [1] It is customary to place a dying person under the icón. One or
  more icóns hang in the hut of each Orthodox peasant.

ANÍSYA. He came to, and creeps about again.

MATRYÓNA. Well, and is he to have extreme unction?

ANÍSYA. The neighbours advise it. If he lives till to-morrow we'll send
for the priest.

NEIGHBOUR. Oh, Anísya dear, I should think your heart must be heavy. As
the saying goes, "Not he is sick that's ill in bed, but he that sits and
waits in dread."

ANÍSYA. Yes, if it were only over one way or other!

NEIGHBOUR. Yes, that's true, dying for a year, it's no joke. You're
bound hand and foot like that.

MATRYÓNA. Ah, but a widow's lot is also bitter. It's all right as long
as one's young, but who'll care for you when you're old? Oh yes, old age
is not pleasure. Just look at me. I've not walked very far, and yet am
so footsore I don't know how to stand. Where's my son?

ANÍSYA. Ploughing. But you come in and we'll get the samovár ready; the
tea'll set you up again.

MATRYÓNA [sitting down] Yes, it's true, I'm quite done up, my dears. As
to extreme unction, that's absolutely necessary. Besides, they say it's
good for the soul.

ANÍSYA. Yes, we'll send to-morrow.

MATRYÓNA. Yes, you had better. And we've had a wedding down in our
parts.

NEIGHBOUR. What, in spring?[2]

  [2] Peasant weddings are usually in autumn. They are forbidden in
  Lent, and soon after Easter the peasants become too busy to marry till
  harvest is over.

MATRYÓNA. Ah, now if it were a poor man, then, as the saying is, it's
always unseasonable for a poor man to marry. But it's Simon Matvéyitch,
he's married that Marína.

ANÍSYA. What luck for her!

NEIGHBOUR. He's a widower. I suppose there are children?

MATRYÓNA. Four of 'em. What decent girl would have him! Well, so he's
taken her, and she's glad. You see, the vessel was not sound, so the
wine trickled out.

NEIGHBOUR. Oh my! And what do people say to it? And he, a rich peasant!

MATRYÓNA. They are living well enough so far.

NEIGHBOUR. Yes, it's true enough. Who wants to marry where there are
children? There now, there's our Michael. He's such a fellow, dear me ...

PEASANT'S VOICE. Hullo, Mávra. Where the devil are you? Go and drive the
cow in.

    Exit Neighbour.

MATRYÓNA [while the Neighbour is within hearing speaks in her ordinary
voice] Yes, lass, thank goodness, she's married. At any rate my old fool
won't go bothering about Nikíta. Now [suddenly changing her tone], she's
gone! [Whispers] I say, did you give him the tea?

ANÍSYA. Don't speak about it. He'd better die of himself. It's no
use--he doesn't die, and I have only taken a sin on my soul. O-oh, my
head, my head! Oh, why did you give me those powders?

MATRYÓNA. What of the powders? The sleeping powders, lass,--why not give
them? No evil can come of them.

ANÍSYA. I am not talking of the sleeping ones, but the others, the white
ones.

MATRYÓNA. Well, honey, those powders are medicinal.

ANÍSYA [sighs] I know, yet it's frightening. Though he's worried me to
death.

MATRYÓNA. Well, and did you use many?

ANÍSYA. I gave two doses.

MATRYÓNA. Was anything noticeable?

ANÍSYA. I had a taste of the tea myself--just a little bitter. And he
drank them with the tea and says, "Even tea disgusts me," and I say,
"Everything tastes bitter when one's sick." But I felt that scared,
mother.

MATRYÓNA. Don't go thinking about it. The more one thinks the worse it
is.

ANÍSYA. I wish you'd never given them to me and led me into sin. When I
think of it something seems to tear my heart. Oh dear, why did you give
them to me?

MATRYÓNA. What do you mean, honey? Lord help you! Why are you turning it
on to me? Mind, lass, don't go twisting matters from the sick on to the
healthy. If anything were to happen, I stand aside! I know nothing! I'm
aware of nothing! I'll kiss the cross on it; I never gave you any kind
of powders, never saw any, never heard of any, and never knew there were
such powders. You think about yourself, lass. Why, we were talking about
you the other day. "Poor thing, what torture she endures. The
step-daughter an idiot; the old man rotten, sucking her life-blood. What
wouldn't one be ready to do in such a case!"

ANÍSYA. I'm not going to deny it. A life such as mine could make one do
worse than that. It could make you hang yourself or throttle him. Is
this a life?

MATRYÓNA. That's just it. There's no time to stand gaping; the money
must be found one way or other, and then he must have his tea.

ANÍSYA. O-oh, my head, my head! I can't think what to do. I am so
frightened; he'd better die of himself. I don't want to have it on my
soul.

MATRYÓNA [viciously] And why doesn't he show the money? Does he mean to
take it along with him? Is no one to have it? Is that right? God forbid
such a sum should be lost all for nothing. Isn't that a sin? What's he
doing? Is he worth considering?

ANÍSYA. I don't know anything. He's worried me to death.

MATRYÓNA. What is it you don't know? The business is clear. If you make
a slip now, you'll repent it all your life. He'll give the money to his
sister and you'll be left without.

ANÍSYA. O-oh dear! Yes, and he did send for her--I must go.

MATRYÓNA. You wait a bit and light the samovár first. We'll give him
some tea and search him together--we'll find it, no fear.

ANÍSYA. Oh dear, oh dear; supposing something were to happen.

MATRYÓNA. What now? What's the good of waiting? Do you want the money to
slip from your hand when it's just in sight? You go and do as I say.

ANÍSYA. Well, I'll go and light the samovár.

MATRYÓNA. Go, honey, do the business so as not to regret it afterwards.
That's right! [Anísya turns to go. Matryóna calls her back].

MATRYÓNA. Just a word. Don't tell Nikíta about the business. He's silly.
God forbid he should find out about the powders. The Lord only knows
what he would do. He's so tender-hearted. D'you know, he usen't to be
able to kill a chicken. Don't tell him. 'Twould be a fine go, he
wouldn't understand things. [Stops horror-struck as Peter appears in the
doorway].

PETER [holding on to the wall, creeps out into the porch and calls with
a faint voice] How's it one can't make you hear? Oh, oh, Anísya! Who's
there? [Drops on the bench].

ANÍSYA [steps from behind the corner] Why have you come out? You should
have stayed where you were lying.

PETER. Has the girl gone for Martha? It's very hard.... Oh, if only
death would come quicker!

ANÍSYA. She had no time. I sent her to the river. Wait a bit, I'll go
myself when I'm ready.

PETER. Send Nan. Where's she? Oh, I'm that bad! Oh, death's at hand!

ANÍSYA. I've sent for her already.

PETER. Oh dear! Then where is she?

ANÍSYA. Where's she got to, the plague seize her!

PETER. Oh, dear! I can't bear it. All my inside's on fire. It's as if a
gimlet were boring me. Why have you left me as if I were a dog?... no
one to give me a drink.... Oh ... send Nan to me.

ANÍSYA. Here she is. Nan, go to father.

    Nan runs in. Anísya goes behind the corner of the house.

PETER. Go you. Oh ... to Aunt Martha, tell her father wants her; say
she's to come, I want her.

NAN. All right.

PETER. Wait a bit. Tell her she's to come quick. Tell her I'm dying.
O-oh!

NAN. I'll just get my shawl and be off. [Runs off].

MATRYÓNA [winking] Now then, mind and look sharp, lass. Go into the hut,
hunt about everywhere, like a dog that's hunting for fleas: look under
everything, and I'll search him.

ANÍSYA [to Matryóna] I feel a bit bolder, somehow, now you're here.
[Goes up to porch. To Peter] Hadn't I better light the samovár? Here's
Mother Matryóna come to see her son; you'll have a cup of tea with her?

PETER. Well then, light it. [Anísya goes into the house. Matryóna comes
up to the porch].

PETER. How do you do?

MATRYÓNA [bowing] How d'you do, my benefactor; how d'you do, my precious
... still ill, I see. And my old man, he's that sorry! "Go," says he,
"see how he's getting on." He sends his respects to you. [Bows again].

PETER. I'm dying.

MATRYÓNA. Ah yes, Peter Ignátitch, now I look at you I see, as the
saying has it, "Sickness lives where men live." You've shrivelled,
shrivelled, all to nothing, poor dear, now I come to look at you. Seems
illness does not add to good looks.

PETER. My last hour has come.

MATRYÓNA. Oh well, Peter Ignátitch, it's God's will you know, you've had
communion, and you'll have unction, God willing. Your missus is a wise
woman, the Lord be thanked; she'll give you a good burial, and have
prayers said for your soul, all most respectable! And my son, he'll look
after things meanwhile.

PETER. There'll be no one to manage things! She's not steady. Has her
head full of folly--why, I know all about it, I know. And my girl is
silly and young. I've got the homestead together, and there's no one to
attend to things. One can't help feeling it. [Whimpers].

MATRYÓNA. Why, if it's money, or something, you can leave orders.

PETER [to Anísya inside the house] Has Nan gone?

MATRYÓNA [aside] There now, he's remembered!

ANÍSYA [from inside] She went then and there. Come inside, won't you?
I'll help you in.

PETER. Let me sit here a bit for the last time. The air's so stuffy
inside. Oh, how bad I feel! Oh, my heart's burning.... Oh, if death
would only come.

MATRYÓNA. If God don't take a soul, the soul can't go out. Death and
life are in God's will, Peter Ignátitch. You can't be sure of death
either. Maybe you'll recover yet. There was a man in our village just
like that, at the very point of death ...

PETER. No, I feel I shall die to-day, I feel it. [Leans back and shuts
his eyes].

ANÍSYA [enters] Well now, are you coming in or not? You do keep one
waiting. Peter! eh, Peter!

MATRYÓNA [steps aside and beckons to Anísya with her finger] Well?

ANÍSYA [comes down the porch steps] Not there.

MATRYÓNA. But have you searched everywhere? Under the floor?

ANÍSYA. No, it's not there either. In the shed perhaps; he was rummaging
there yesterday.

MATRYÓNA. Go, search, search for all you're worth. Go all over
everywhere, as if you licked with your tongue! But I see he'll die this
very day, his nails are turning blue and his face looks earthy. Is the
samovár ready?

ANÍSYA. Just on the boil.

NIKÍTA [comes from the other side, if possible on horseback, up to the
gate, and does not see Peter. To Matryóna] How d'you do, mother, is all
well at home?

MATRYÓNA. The Lord be thanked, we're all alive and have a crust to bite.

NIKÍTA. Well, and how's master?

MATRYÓNA. Hush, there he sits. [Points to porch].

NIKÍTA. Well, let him sit. What's it to me?

PETER [opens his eyes] Nikíta, I say, Nikíta, come here! [Nikíta
approaches. Anísya and Matryóna whisper together].

PETER. Why have you come back so early?

NIKÍTA. I've finished ploughing.

PETER. Have you done the strip beyond the bridge?

NIKÍTA. It's too far to go there.

PETER. Too far? From here it's still farther. You'll have to go on
purpose now. You might have made one job of it. [Anísya, without showing
herself, stands and listens].

MATRYÓNA [approaches] Oh, sonnie, why don't you take more pains for your
master? Your master is ill and depends on you; you should serve him as
you would your own father, straining every muscle just as I always tell
you to.

PETER. Well then--o-oh!... Get out the seed potatoes, and the women will
go and sort them.

ANÍSYA [aside] No fear, I'm not going. He's again sending every one
away; he must have the money on him now, and wants to hide it somewhere.

PETER. Else ... o-oh! when the time comes for planting, they'll all be
rotten. Oh, I can't stand it! [Rises].

MATRYÓNA [runs up into the porch and holds Peter up] Shall I help you
into the hut?

PETER. Help me in. [Stops] Nikíta!

NIKÍTA [angrily] What now?

PETER. I shan't see you again ... I'll die to-day.... Forgive me,[3] for
Christ's sake, forgive me if I have ever sinned against you ... If I
have sinned in word or deed ... There's been all sorts of things.
Forgive me!

  [3] A formal request for forgiveness is customary among Russians, but
  it is often no mere formality. Nikíta's first reply is evasive; his
  second reply, "God will forgive you," is the correct one sanctioned by
  custom.

NIKÍTA. What's there to forgive? I'm a sinner myself.

MATRYÓNA. Ah, sonnie, have some feeling.

PETER. Forgive me, for Christ's sake. [Weeps].

NIKÍTA [snivels] God will forgive you, Daddy Peter. I have no cause to
complain of you. You've never done me any wrong. You forgive me; maybe
I've sinned worse against you. [Weeps].

    Peter goes in whimpering, Matryóna supporting him.

ANÍSYA. Oh, my poor head! It's not without some reason he's hit on that.
[Approaches Nikíta] Why did you say the money was under the floor? It's
not there.

NIKÍTA [does not answer, but cries] I have never had anything bad from
him, nothing but good, and what have I gone and done!

ANÍSYA. Enough now! Where's the money?

NIKÍTA [angrily] How should I know? Go and look for it yourself!

ANÍSYA. What's made you so tender?

NIKÍTA. I am sorry for him,--that sorry. How he cried! Oh dear!

ANÍSYA. Look at him,--seized with pity! He has found someone to pity
too! He's been treating you like a dog, and even just now was giving
orders to have you turned out of the house. You'd better show me some
pity!

NIKÍTA. What are you to be pitied for?

ANÍSYA. If he dies, and the money's been hidden away ...

NIKÍTA. No fear, he'll not hide it ...

ANÍSYA. Oh, Nikíta darling! he's sent for his sister, and wants to give
it to her. It will be a bad lookout for us. How are we going to live, if
he gives her the money? They'll turn me out of the house! You try and
manage somehow! You said he went to the shed last night.

NIKÍTA. I saw him coming from there, but where he's shoved it to, who
can tell?

ANÍSYA. Oh, my poor head! I'll go and have a look there. [Nikíta steps
aside].

MATRYÓNA [comes out of the hut and down the steps of the porch to Anísya
and Nikíta] Don't go anywhere. He's got the money on him. I felt it on a
string round his neck.

ANÍSYA. Oh my head, my head!

MATRYÓNA. If you don't keep wide awake now, then you may whistle for it.
If his sister comes--then good-bye to it!

ANÍSYA. That's true. She'll come and he'll give it her. What's to be
done? Oh my poor head!

MATRYÓNA. What is to be done? Why, look here; the samovár is boiling, go
and make the tea and pour him out a cup, and then [whispers] put in all
that's left in the paper. When he's drunk the cup, then just take it.
He'll not tell, no fear.

ANÍSYA. Oh! I'm afeared!

MATRYÓNA. Don't be talking now, but look alive, and I'll keep his sister
off if need be. Mind, don't make a blunder! Get hold of the money and
bring it here, and Nikíta will hide it.

ANÍSYA. Oh my head, my head! I don't know how I'm going to ...

MATRYÓNA. Don't talk about it I tell you, do as I bid you. Nikíta!

NIKÍTA. What is it?

MATRYÓNA. You stay here--sit down--in case something is wanted.

NIKÍTA [waves his hand] Oh these women, what won't they be up to? Muddle
one up completely. Bother them! I'll really go and fetch out the
potatoes.

MATRYÓNA [catches him by the arm] Stay here, I tell you.

    Nan enters.

ANÍSYA. Well?

NAN. She was down in her daughter's vegetable plot--she's coming.

ANÍSYA. Coming! What shall we do?

MATRYÓNA. There's plenty of time if you do as I tell you.

ANÍSYA. I don't know what to do; I know nothing, my brain's all in a
whirl. Nan! Go, daughter, and see to the calves, they'll have run away,
I'm afraid.... Oh dear, I haven't the courage.

MATRYÓNA. Go on! I should think the samovár's boiling over.

ANÍSYA. Oh my head, my poor head! [Exit].

MATRYÓNA [approaches Nikíta] Now then, sonnie. [Sits down beside him]
Your affairs must also be thought about, and not left anyhow.

NIKÍTA. What affairs?

MATRYÓNA. Why, this affair--how you're to live your life.

NIKÍTA. How to live my life? Others live, and I shall live!

MATRYÓNA. The old man will probably die to-day.

NIKÍTA. Well, if he dies, God give him rest! What's that to me?

MATRYÓNA [keeps looking towards the porch while she speaks] Eh, sonnie!
Those that are alive have to think about living. One needs plenty of
sense in these matters, honey. What do you think? I've tramped all over
the place after your affairs, I've got quite footsore bothering about
matters. And you must not forget me when the time comes.

NIKÍTA. And what's it you've been bothering about?

MATRYÓNA. About your affairs, about your future. If you don't take
trouble in good time you'll get nothing. You know Iván Moséitch? Well,
I've been to him too. I went there the other day. I had something else
to settle, you know. Well, so I sat and chatted awhile and then came to
the point. "Tell me, Iván Moséitch," says I, "how's one to manage an
affair of this kind? Supposing," says I, "a peasant as is a widower
married a second wife, and supposing all the children he has is a
daughter by the first wife, and a daughter by the second. Then," says I,
"when that peasant dies, could an outsider get hold of the homestead by
marrying the widow? Could he," says I, "give both the daughters in
marriage and remain master of the house himself?" "Yes, he could," says
he, "but," says he, "it would mean a deal of trouble; still the thing
could be managed by means of money, but if there's no money it's no good
trying."

NIKÍTA [laughs] That goes without saying, only fork out the money. Who
does not want money?

MATRYÓNA. Well then, honey, so I spoke out plainly about the affair. And
he says, "First and foremost, your son will have to get himself on the
register of that village--that will cost something. The elders will have
to be treated. And they, you see, they'll sign. Everything," says he,
"must be done sensibly." Look, [unwraps her kerchief and takes out a
paper] he's written out this paper; just read it, you're a scholar, you
know. [Nikíta reads].

NIKÍTA. This paper's only a decision for the elders to sign. There's no
great wisdom needed for that.

MATRYÓNA. But you just hear what Iván Moséitch bids us do. "Above all,"
he says, "mind and don't let the money slip away, dame. If she don't get
hold of the money," he says, "they'll not let her do it. Money's the
great thing!" So look out, sonnie, things are coming to a head.

NIKÍTA. What's that to me? The money's hers--so let her look out.

MATRYÓNA. Ah, sonnie, how you look at it! How can a woman manage such
affairs? Even if she does get the money, is she capable of arranging it
all? One knows what a woman is! You're a man anyhow. You can hide it,
and all that. You see, you've after all got more sense, in case of
anything happening.

NIKÍTA. Oh, your woman's notions are all so inexpedient!

MATRYÓNA. Why inexpedient? You just collar the money, and the woman's in
your hands. And then should she ever turn snappish you'd be able to
tighten the reins!

NIKÍTA. Bother you all,--I'm going.

ANÍSYA [quite pale, runs out of the hut and round the corner to
Matryóna] So it was, it was on him! Here it is! [Shows that she has
something under her apron].

MATRYÓNA. Give it to Nikíta, he'll hide it. Nikíta, take it and hide it
somewhere.

NIKÍTA. All right, give here!

ANÍSYA. O-oh, my poor head! No, I'd better do it myself. [Goes towards
the gate].

MATRYÓNA [seizing her by the arm] Where are you going to? You'll be
missed. There's the sister coming; give it him; he knows what to do. Eh,
you blockhead!

ANÍSYA [stops irresolutely] Oh, my head, my head!

NIKÍTA. Well, give it here. I'll shove it away somewhere.

ANÍSYA. Where will you shove it to?

NIKÍTA [laughing] Why, are you afraid?

    Enter Akoulína, carrying clothes from the wash.

ANÍSYA. O-oh, my poor head! [Gives the money] Mind, Nikíta.

NIKÍTA. What are you afraid of? I'll hide it so that I'll not be able to
find it myself. [Exit].

ANÍSYA [stands in terror] Oh dear, and supposing he ...

MATRYÓNA. Well, is he dead?

ANÍSYA. Yes, he seems dead. He did not move when I took it.

MATRYÓNA. Go in, there's Akoulína.

ANÍSYA. Well there, I've done the sin and he has the money....

MATRYÓNA. Have done and go in! There's Martha coming!

ANÍSYA. There now, I've trusted him. What's going to happen now? [Exit].

MARTHA [enters from one side, Akoulína enters from the other. To
Akoulína] I should have come before, but I was at my daughter's. Well,
how's the old man? Is he dying?

AKOULÍNA [puts down the clothes] Don't know, I've been to the river.

MARTHA [pointing to Matryóna] Who's that?

MATRYÓNA. I'm from Zoúevo. I'm Nikíta's mother from Zoúevo, my dearie.
Good afternoon to you. He's withering, withering away, poor dear--your
brother, I mean. He came out himself. "Send for my sister," he said,
"because," said he ... Dear me, why, I do believe, he's dead!

ANÍSYA [runs out screaming. Clings to a post, and begins wailing][4] Oh,
oh, ah! who-o-o-m have you left me to, why-y-y have you dese-e-e-e-rted
me--a miserable widow ... to live my life alone ... Why have you closed
your bright eyes ...

  [4] Loud public wailing of this kind is customary, and considered
  indispensable, among the peasants.

    Enter Neighbour. Matryóna and Neighbour catch hold of Anísya under
    the arms to support her. Akoulína and Martha go into the hut. A
    crowd assembles.

A VOICE IN THE CROWD. Send for the old women to lay out the body.

MATRYÓNA [rolls up her sleeves] Is there any water in the copper? But I
daresay the samovár is still hot. I'll also go and help a bit.


                                Curtain.




ACT III

    The same hut. Winter. Nine months have passed since Act II. Anísya,
    plainly dressed, sits before a loom weaving. Nan is on the oven.


MÍTRITCH [an old labourer, enters, and slowly takes off his outdoor
things] Oh Lord, have mercy! Well, hasn't the master come home yet?

ANÍSYA. What?

MÍTRITCH. Nikíta isn't back from town, is he?

ANÍSYA. No.

MÍTRITCH. Must have been on the spree. Oh Lord!

ANÍSYA. Have you finished in the stackyard?

MÍTRITCH. What d'you think? Got it all as it should be, and covered
everything with straw! I don't like doing things by halves! Oh Lord!
holy Nicholas! [Picks at the corns on his hands] But it's time he was
back.

ANÍSYA. What need has he to hurry? He's got money. Merry-making with
that girl, I daresay ...

MÍTRITCH. Why shouldn't one make merry if one has the money? And why did
Akoulína go to town?

ANÍSYA. You'd better ask her. How do I know what the devil took her
there!

MÍTRITCH. What! to town? There's all sorts of things to be got in town
if one's got the means. Oh Lord!

NAN. Mother, I heard myself. "I'll get you a little shawl," he says,
blest if he didn't; "you shall choose it yourself," he says. And she got
herself up so fine; she put on her velveteen coat and the French shawl.

ANÍSYA. Really, a girl's modesty reaches only to the door. Step over the
threshold and it's forgotten. She is a shameless creature.

MÍTRITCH. Oh my! What's the use of being ashamed? While there's plenty
of money make merry. Oh Lord! It is too soon to have supper, eh? [Anísya
does not answer] I'll go and get warm meanwhile. [Climbs on the stove]
Oh Lord! Blessed Virgin Mother! holy Nicholas!

NEIGHBOUR [enters] Seems your goodman's not back yet?

ANÍSYA. No.

NEIGHBOUR. It's time he was. Hasn't he perhaps stopped at our inn? My
sister, Thekla, says there's heaps of sledges standing there as have
come from the town.

ANÍSYA. Nan! Nan, I say!

NAN. Yes?

ANÍSYA. You run to the inn and see! Mayhap, being drunk, he's gone
there.

NAN [jumps down from the oven and dresses] All right.

NEIGHBOUR. And he's taken Akoulína with him?

ANÍSYA. Else he'd not have had any need of going. It's because of her
he's unearthed all the business there. "Must go to the bank," he says;
"it's time to receive the payments," he says. But it's all her fooling.

NEIGHBOUR [shakes her head] It's a bad look-out. [Silence].

NAN [at the door] And if he's there, what am I to say?

ANÍSYA. You only see if he's there.

NAN. All right. I'll be back in a winking. [Long silence].

MÍTRITCH [roars] Oh Lord! merciful Nicholas!

NEIGHBOUR [starting] Oh, how he scared me? Who is it?

ANÍSYA. Why, Mítritch, our labourer.

NEIGHBOUR. Oh dear, oh dear, what a fright he did give me! I had quite
forgotten. But tell me, dear, I've heard someone's been wooing
Akoulína?

ANÍSYA [gets up from the loom and sits down by the table] There was some
one from Dédlovo; but it seems the affair's got wind there too. They
made a start, and then stopped; so the thing fell through. Of course,
who'd care to?

NEIGHBOUR. And the Lizounófs from Zoúevo?

ANÍSYA. They made some steps too, but it didn't come off either. They
won't even see us.

NEIGHBOUR. Yet it's time she was married.

ANÍSYA. Time and more than time! Ah, my dear, I'm that impatient to get
her out of the house; but the matter does not come off. He does not wish
it, nor she either. He's not yet had enough of his beauty, you see.

NEIGHBOUR. Eh, eh, eh, what doings! Only think of it. Why, he's her
step-father!

ANÍSYA. Ah, friend, they've taken me in completely. They've done me so
fine it's beyond saying. I, fool that I was, noticed nothing, suspected
nothing, and so I married him. I guessed nothing, but they already
understood one another.

NEIGHBOUR. Oh dear, what goings on!

ANÍSYA. So it went on from bad to worse, and I see they begin hiding
from me. Ah, friend, I was that sick--that sick of my life! It's not as
if I didn't love him.

NEIGHBOUR. That goes without saying.

ANÍSYA. Ah, how hard it is to bear such treatment from him! Oh, how it
hurts!

NEIGHBOUR. Yes, and I've heard say he's becoming too free with his
fists?

ANÍSYA. And that too! There was a time when he was gentle when he'd had
a drop. He used to hit out before, but of me he was always fond! But now
when he's in a temper he goes for me and is ready to trample me under
his feet. The other day he got both hands entangled in my hair so that I
could hardly get away. And the girl's worse than a serpent; it's a
wonder the earth bears such furies.

NEIGHBOUR. Ah, ah, my dear, now I look at you, you are a sufferer! To
suffer like that is no joke. To have given shelter to a beggar, and he
to lead you such a dance! Why don't you pull in the reins?

ANÍSYA. Ah, but my dear, if it weren't for my heart! Him as is gone was
stern enough, still I could twist him about any way I liked; but with
this one I can do nothing. As soon as I see him all my anger goes. I
haven't a grain of courage before him; I go about like a drowned hen.

NEIGHBOUR. Ah, neighbour, you must be under a spell. I've heard that
Matryóna goes in for that sort of thing. It must be her.

ANÍSYA. Yes, dear; I think so myself sometimes. Gracious me, how hurt I
feel at times! I'd like to tear him to pieces. But when I set eyes on
him, my heart won't go against him.

NEIGHBOUR. It's plain you're bewitched. It don't take long to blight a
body. There now, when I look at you, what you have dwindled to!

ANÍSYA. Growing a regular spindle-shanks. And just look at that fool
Akoulína. Wasn't the girl a regular untidy slattern, and just look at
her now! Where has it all come from? Yes, he has fitted her out. She's
grown so smart, so puffed up, just like a bubble that's ready to burst.
And, though she's a fool, she's got it into her head, "I'm the
mistress," she says; "the house is mine; it's me father wanted him to
marry." And she's that vicious! Lord help us, when she gets into a rage
she's ready to tear the thatch off the house.

NEIGHBOUR. Oh dear, what a life yours is, now I come to look at you. And
yet there's people envying you: "They're rich," they say; but it seems
that gold don't keep tears from falling.

ANÍSYA. Much reason for envy indeed! And the riches, too, will soon be
made ducks and drakes of. Dear me, how he squanders money!

NEIGHBOUR. But how's it, dear, you've been so simple to give up the
money? It's yours.

ANÍSYA. Ah, if you knew all! The thing is that I've made one little
mistake.

NEIGHBOUR. Well, if I were you, I'd go straight and have the law of him.
The money's yours; how dare he squander it? There's no such rights.

ANÍSYA. They don't pay heed to that nowadays.

NEIGHBOUR. Ah, my dear, now I come to look at you, you've got that weak.

ANÍSYA. Yes, quite weak, dear, quite weak. He's got me into a regular
fix. I don't myself know anything. Oh, my poor head!

NEIGHBOUR [listening] There's someone coming, I think. [The door opens
and Akím enters].

AKÍM [crosses himself, knocks the snow off his feet, and takes off his
coat] Peace be to this house! How do you do? Are you well, daughter?

ANÍSYA. How d'you do, father? Do you come straight from home?

AKÍM. I've been a-thinking, I'll go and see what's name, go to see my
son, I mean,--my son. I didn't start early--had my dinner, I mean; I
went, and it's so what d'you call it--so snowy, hard walking, and so
there I'm what d'you call it--late, I mean. And my son--is he at home?
At home? My son, I mean.

ANÍSYA. No; he's gone to the town.

AKÍM [sits down on a bench] I've some business with him, d'you see, some
business, I mean. I told him t'other day, told him I was in need--told
him, I mean, that our horse was done for, our horse, you see. So we must
what d'ye call it, get a horse, I mean, some kind of a horse, I mean. So
there, I've come, you see.

ANÍSYA. Nikíta told me. When he comes back you'll have a talk. [Goes to
the oven] Have some supper now, and he'll soon come. Mítritch, eh
Mítritch, come have your supper.

MÍTRITCH. Oh Lord! merciful Nicholas!

ANÍSYA. Come to supper.

NEIGHBOUR. I shall go now. Good-night. [Exit].

MÍTRITCH [gets down from the oven] I never noticed how I fell asleep. Oh
Lord! gracious Nicholas! How d'you do, Daddy Akím?

AKÍM. Ah, Mítritch! What are you, what d'ye call it, I mean?...

MÍTRITCH. Why, I'm working for your son, Nikíta.

AKÍM. Dear me! What d'ye call ... working for my son, I mean. Dear me!

MÍTRITCH. I was living with a tradesman in town, but drank all I had
there. Now I've come back to the village. I've no home, so I've gone
into service. [Gapes] Oh Lord!

AKÍM. But how's that, what d'you call it, or what's name, Nikíta, what
does he do? Has he some business, I mean besides, that he should hire a
labourer, a labourer I mean, hire a labourer?

ANÍSYA. What business should he have? He used to manage, but now he's
other things on his mind, so he's hired a labourer.

MÍTRITCH. Why shouldn't he, seeing he has money?

AKÍM. Now that's what d'you call it, that's wrong, I mean, quite wrong,
I mean. That's spoiling oneself.

ANÍSYA. Oh, he has got spoilt, that spoilt, it's just awful.

AKÍM. There now, what d'you call it, one thinks how to make things
better, and it gets worse I mean. Riches spoil a man, spoil, I mean.

MÍTRITCH. Fatness makes even a dog go mad; how's one not to get spoilt
by fat living? Myself now; how I went on with fat living. I drank for
three weeks without being sober. I drank my last breeches. When I had
nothing left, I gave it up. Now I've determined not to. Bother it!

AKÍM. And where's what d'you call, your old woman?

MÍTRITCH. My old woman has found her right place, old fellow. She's
hanging about the gin-shops in town. She's a swell too; one eye knocked
out, and the other black, and her muzzle twisted to one side. And she's
never sober; drat her!

AKÍM. Oh, oh, oh, how's that?

MÍTRITCH. And where's a soldier's wife to go? She has found her right
place. [Silence].

AKÍM [to Anísya] And Nikíta,--has he what d'you call it, taken anything
up to town? I mean, anything to sell?

ANÍSYA [laying the table and serving up] No, he's taken nothing. He's
gone to get money from the bank.

AKÍM [sitting down to supper] Why? D'you wish to put it to another use,
the money I mean?

ANÍSYA. No, we don't touch it. Only some twenty or thirty roubles as
have come due; they must be taken.

AKÍM. Must be taken. Why take it, the money I mean? You'll take some
to-day I mean, and some to-morrow; and so you'll what d'you call it,
take it all, I mean.

ANÍSYA. We get this besides. The money is all safe.

AKÍM. All safe? How's that, safe? You take it, and it what d'you call
it, it's all safe. How's that? You put a heap of meal into a bin, or a
barn, I mean, and go on taking meal, will it remain there what d'you
call it, all safe I mean? That's, what d'you call it, it's cheating.
You'd better find out, or else they'll cheat you. Safe indeed! I mean
you what d'ye call ... you take it and it remains all safe there?

ANÍSYA. I know nothing about it. Iván Moséitch advised us at the time.
"Put the money in the bank," he said, "the money will be safe, and
you'll get interest," he said.

MÍTRITCH [having finished his supper] That's so. I've lived with a
tradesman. They all do like that. Put the money in the bank, then lie
down on the oven and it will keep coming in.

AKÍM. That's queer talk. How's that--what d'ye call, coming in, how's
that coming in, and they, who do they get it from I mean, the money I
mean?

ANÍSYA. They take the money out of the bank.

MÍTRITCH. Get along! 'Tain't a thing a woman can understand! You look
here, I'll make it all clear to you. Mind and remember. You see, suppose
you've got some money, and I, for instance, have spring coming on, my
land's idle, I've got no seeds, or I have to pay taxes. So, you see, I
go to you. "Akím," I say, "give us a ten-rouble note, and when I've
harvested in autumn I'll return it, and till two acres for you besides,
for having obliged me!" And you, seeing I've something to fall back
on--a horse say, or a cow--you say, "No, give two or three roubles for
the obligation," and there's an end of it. I'm stuck in the mud, and
can't do without. So I say, "All right!" and take a tenner. In the
autumn, when I've made my turnover, I bring it back, and you squeeze the
extra three roubles out of me.

AKÍM. Yes, but that's what peasants do when they what d'ye call it, when
they forget God. It's not honest, I mean, it's no good, I mean.

MÍTRITCH. You wait. You'll see it comes just to the same thing. Now
don't forget how you've skinned me. And Anísya, say, has got some money
lying idle. She does not know what to do with it, besides, she's a
woman, and does not know how to use it. She comes to you. "Couldn't you
make some profit with my money too?" she says. "Why not?" say you, and
you wait. Before the summer I come again and say, "Give me another
tenner, and I'll be obliged." Then you find out if my hide isn't all
gone, and if I can be skinned again you give me Anísya's money. But
supposing I'm clean shorn,--have nothing to eat,--then you see I can't
be fleeced any more, and you say, "Go your way, friend," and you look
out for another, and lend him your own and Anísya's money and skin him.
That's what the bank is. So it goes round and round. It's a cute thing,
old fellow!

AKÍM [excitedly] Gracious me, whatever is that like? It's what d'ye call
it, it's filthy! The peasants--what d'ye call it, the peasants do so I
mean, and know it's, what d'ye call it, a sin! It's what d'you call, not
right, not right, I mean. It's filthy! How can people as have learnt ...
what d'ye call it ...

MÍTRITCH. That, old fellow, is just what they're fond of! And remember,
them that are stupid, or the women folk, as can't put their money into
use themselves, they take it to the bank, and they there, deuce take
'em, clutch hold of it, and with this money they fleece the people. It's
a cute thing!

AKÍM [sighing] Oh dear, I see, what d'ye call it, without money it's
bad, and with money it's worse! How's that? God told us to work, but
you, what d'ye call ... I mean you put money into the bank and go to
sleep, and the money will what d'ye call it, will feed you while you
sleep. It's filthy, that's what I call it; it's not right.

MÍTRITCH. Not right? Eh, old fellow, who cares about that nowadays? And
how clean they pluck you, too! That's the fact of the matter.

AKÍM [sighs] Ah yes, seems the time's what d'ye call it, the time's
growing ripe. There, I've had a look at the closets in town. What
they've come to! It's all polished and polished I mean, it's fine, it's
what d'ye call it, it's like inside an inn. And what's it all for?
What's the good of it? Oh, they've forgotten God. Forgotten, I mean.
We've forgotten, forgotten God, God I mean! Thank you, my dear, I've
had enough. I'm quite satisfied. [Rises. Mítritch climbs on to the
oven].

ANÍSYA [eats, and collects the dishes] If his father would only take him
to task! But I'm ashamed to tell him.

AKÍM. What d'you say?

ANÍSYA. Oh! it's nothing.

    Enter Nan.

AKÍM. Here's a good girl, always busy! You're cold, I should think?

NAN. Yes, I am, terribly. How d'you do, grandfather?

ANÍSYA. Well? Is he there?

NAN. No. But Andriyán is there. He's been to town, and he says he saw
them at an inn in town. He says Dad's as drunk as drunk can be!

ANÍSYA. Do you want anything to eat? Here you are.

NAN [goes to the oven] Well, it _is_ cold. My hands are quite numb.
[Akím takes off his leg-bands and bast-shoes. Anísya washes up].

ANÍSYA. Father!

AKÍM. Well, what is it?

ANÍSYA. And is Marína living well?

AKÍM. Yes, she's living all right. The little woman is what d'ye call
it, clever and steady; she's living, and what d'ye call it, doing her
best. She's all right; the little woman's of the right sort I mean;
painstaking and what d'ye call it, submissive; the little woman's all
right I mean, all right, you know.

ANÍSYA. And is there no talk in your village that a relative of Marína's
husband thinks of marrying our Akoulína? Have you heard nothing of it?

AKÍM. Ah; that's Mirónof. Yes, the women did chatter something. But I
didn't pay heed, you know. It don't interest me I mean, I don't know
anything. Yes, the old women did say something, but I've a bad memory,
bad memory, I mean. But the Mirónofs are what d'ye call it, they're
all right, I mean they're all right.

ANÍSYA. I'm that impatient to get her settled.

AKÍM. And why?

NAN [listens] They've come!

ANÍSYA. Well, don't you go bothering them. [Goes on washing the spoons
without turning her head].

NIKÍTA [enters] Anísya! Wife! who has come? [Anísya looks up and turns
away in silence].

NIKÍTA [severely] Who has come? Have you forgotten?

ANÍSYA. Now don't humbug. Come in!

NIKÍTA [still more severely] Who's come?

ANÍSYA [goes up and takes him by the arm] Well then, husband has come.
Now then, come in!

NIKÍTA [holds back] Ah, that's it! Husband! And what's husband called?
Speak properly.

ANÍSYA. Oh bother you! Nikíta!

NIKÍTA. Where have you learnt manners? The full name.

ANÍSYA. Nikíta Akímitch! Now then!

NIKÍTA [still in the doorway] Ah, that's it! But now--the surname?

ANÍSYA [laughs and pulls him by the arm] Tchilíkin. Dear me, what airs!

NIKÍTA. Ah, that's it. [Holds on to the door-post] No, now say with
which foot Tchilíkin steps into this house!

ANÍSYA. That's enough! You're letting the cold in!

NIKÍTA. Say with which foot he steps? You've got to say it,--that's
flat.

ANÍSYA [aside] He'll go on worrying. [To Nikíta] Well then, with the
left. Come in!

NIKÍTA. Ah, that's it.

ANÍSYA. You look who's in the hut!

NIKÍTA. Ah, my parent! Well, what of that? I'm not ashamed of my
parent. I can pay my respects to my parent. How d'you do, father? [Bows
and puts out his hand] My respects to you.

  [Illustration: THE POWER OF DARKNESS. ACT III.

  ANÍSYA. Come in!

  NIKÍTA. Ah, that's it.

  ANÍSYA. You look who's in the hut!

  NIKÍTA. Ah, my parent! Well, what of that? I'm not ashamed of my
  parent.]

AKÍM [does not answer] Drink, I mean drink, what it does! It's filthy!

NIKÍTA. Drink, what's that? I've been drinking? I'm to blame, that's
flat! I've had a glass with a friend, drank his health.

ANÍSYA. Go and lie down, I say.

NIKÍTA. Wife, say where am I standing?

ANÍSYA. Now then, it's all right, lie down!

NIKÍTA. No, I'll first drink a samovár with my parent. Go and light the
samovár. Akoulína, I say, come here!

    Enter Akoulína, smartly dressed and carrying their purchases.

AKOULÍNA. Why have you thrown everything about? Where's the yarn?

NIKÍTA. The yarn? The yarn's there. Hullo, Mítritch, where are you?
Asleep? Asleep? Go and put the horse up.

AKÍM [not seeing Akoulína but looking at his son] Dear me, what is he
doing? The old man's what d'ye call it, quite done up, I mean,--been
thrashing,--and look at him, what d'ye call it, putting on airs! Put up
the horse! Faugh, what filth!

MÍTRITCH [climbs down from the oven, and puts on felt boots] Oh,
merciful Lord! Is the horse in the yard? Done it to death, I dare say.
Just see how he's been swilling, the deuce take him. Up to his very
throat. Oh Lord, holy Nicholas! [Puts on sheepskin, and exit].

NIKÍTA [sits down] You must forgive me, father. It's true I've had a
drop; well, what of that? Even a hen will drink. Ain't it true? So you
must forgive me. Never mind Mítritch, he doesn't mind, he'll put it up.

ANÍSYA. Shall I really light the samovár?

NIKÍTA. Light it! My parent has come. I wish to talk to him, and shall
drink tea with him. [To Akoulína] Have you brought all the parcels?

AKOULÍNA. The parcels? I've brought mine, the rest's in the sledge. Hi,
take this, this isn't mine!

    Throws a parcel on the table and puts the others into her box. Nan
    watches her while she puts them away. Akím does not look at his son,
    but puts his leg-bands and bast-shoes on the oven.

ANÍSYA [going out with the samovár] Her box is full as it is, and still
he's bought more!

  [Illustration: THE POWER OF DARKNESS. ACT III.

  NIKÍTA. Have you brought all the parcels?

  AKOULÍNA. The parcels? I've brought mine, the rest's in the sledge.

  ANÍSYA. Her box is full as it is, and still he's bought more!]

NIKÍTA [pretending to be sober] You must not be cross with me, father.
You think I'm drunk? I am all there, that's flat! As they say, "Drink,
but keep your wits about you." I can talk with you at once, father. I
can attend to any business. You told me about the money; your horse is
worn-out,--I remember! That can all be managed. That's all in our hands.
If it was an enormous sum that's wanted, then we might wait; but as it
is I can do everything. That's the case.

AKÍM [goes on fidgeting with the leg-bands] Eh, lad, "It's ill sledging
when the thaw has set in."

NIKÍTA. What d'you mean by that? "And it's ill talking with one who is
drunk"? But don't you worry, let's have some tea. And I can do anything;
that's flat! I can put everything to rights.

AKÍM [shakes his head] Eh, eh, eh!

NIKÍTA. The money, here it is. [Puts his hand in his pocket, pulls out
pocket-book, handles the notes in it and takes out a ten-rouble note]
Take this to get a horse; I can't forget my parent. I shan't forsake
him, that's flat. Because he's my parent! Here you are, take it! Really
now, I don't grudge it. [Comes up and pushes the note towards Akím who
won't take it. Nikíta catches hold of his father's hand] Take it, I tell
you. I don't grudge it.

AKÍM. I can't, what d'you call it, I mean, can't take it! And can't what
d'ye call it, talk to you, because you're not yourself, I mean.

NIKÍTA. I'll not let you go! Take it! [Puts the money into Akím's hand].

ANÍSYA [enters, and stops] You'd better take it, he'll give you no
peace!

AKÍM [takes it, and shakes his head] Oh! that liquor. Not like a man, I
mean!

NIKÍTA. That's better! If you repay it you'll repay it, if not I'll make
no bother. That's what I am! [Sees Akoulína] Akoulína, show your
presents.

AKOULÍNA. What?

NIKÍTA. Show your presents.

AKOULÍNA. The presents, what's the use of showing 'em? I've put 'em
away.

NIKÍTA. Get them, I tell you. Nan will like to see 'em. Undo the shawl.
Give it here.

AKÍM. Oh, oh! It's sickening! [Climbs on the oven].

AKOULÍNA [gets out the parcels and puts them on the table] Well, there
you are,--what's the good of looking at 'em?

NAN. Oh how lovely! It's as good as Stepanída's.

AKOULÍNA. Stepanída's? What's Stepanída's compared to this? [Brightening
up and undoing the parcels] Just look here,--see the quality! It's a
French one.

NAN. The print _is_ fine! Mary has a dress like it, only lighter on a
blue ground. This _is_ pretty.

NIKÍTA. Ah, that's it!

    Anísya passes angrily into the closet, returns with a tablecloth and
    the chimney of the samovár, and goes up to the table.

ANÍSYA. Drat you, littering the table!

NIKÍTA. You look here!

ANÍSYA. What am I to look at? Have I never seen anything? Put it away!
[Sweeps the shawl on to the floor with her arm].

AKOULÍNA. What are you pitching things down for? You pitch your own
things about! [Picks up the shawl].

NIKÍTA. Anísya! Look here!

ANÍSYA. Why am I to look?

NIKÍTA. You think I have forgotten you? Look here! [Shows her a parcel
and sits down on it] It's a present for you. Only you must earn it!
Wife, where am I sitting?

ANÍSYA. Enough of your humbug. I'm not afraid of you. Whose money are
you spreeing on and buying your fat wench presents with? Mine!

AKOULÍNA. Yours indeed? No fear! You wished to steal it, but it did not
come off! Get out of the way! [Pushes her while trying to pass].

ANÍSYA. What are you shoving for? I'll teach you to shove!

AKOULÍNA. Shove me? You try! [Presses against Anísya].

NIKÍTA. Now then, now then, you women. Have done now! [Steps between
them].

AKOULÍNA. Comes shoving herself in! You ought to keep quiet and remember
your doings! You think no one knows!

ANÍSYA. Knows what? Out with it, out with it! What do they know?

AKOULÍNA. I know something about you!

ANÍSYA. You're a slut who goes with another's husband!

AKOULÍNA. And you did yours to death!

ANÍSYA [throwing herself on Akoulína] You're raving!

NIKÍTA [holding her back] Anísya, you seem to have forgotten!

ANÍSYA. Want to frighten me! I'm not afraid of you!

NIKÍTA [turns Anísya round and pushes her out] Be off!

ANÍSYA. Where am I to go? I'll not go out of my own house!

NIKÍTA. Be off, I tell you, and don't dare to come in here!

ANÍSYA. I won't go! [Nikíta pushes her, Anísya cries and screams and
clings to the door] What! am I to be turned out of my own house by the
scruff of the neck? What are you doing, you scoundrel? Do you think
there's no law for you? You wait a bit!

NIKÍTA. Now then!

ANÍSYA. I'll go to the Elder! To the policeman!

NIKÍTA. Off, I tell you! [Pushes her out].

ANÍSYA [behind the door] I'll hang myself!

NIKÍTA. No fear!

NAN. Oh, oh, oh! Mother, dear, darling! [Cries].

NIKÍTA. Me frightened of her! A likely thing! What are you crying for?
She'll come back, no fear. Go and see to the samovár. [Exit Nan].

AKOULÍNA [collects and folds her presents] The mean wretch, how she's
messed it up. But wait a bit, I'll cut up her jacket for her! Sure I
will!

NIKÍTA. I've turned her out, what more do you want?

AKOULÍNA. She's dirtied my new shawl. If that bitch hadn't gone away,
I'd have torn her eyes out!

NIKÍTA. That's enough. Why should you be angry? Now if I loved her ...

AKOULÍNA. Loved her? She's worth loving, with her fat mug! If you'd have
given her up, then nothing would have happened. You should have sent her
to the devil. And the house was mine all the same, and the money was
mine! Says she is the mistress, but what sort of mistress is she to her
husband? She's a murderess, that's what she is! She'll serve you the
same way!

NIKÍTA. Oh dear, how's one to stop a woman's jaw? You don't yourself
know what you're jabbering about!

AKOULÍNA. Yes, I do. I'll not live with her! I'll turn her out of the
house! She can't live here with me. The mistress indeed! She's not the
mistress,--that jailbird!

NIKÍTA. That's enough! What have you to do with her? Don't mind her. You
look at me! I am the master! I do as I like. I've ceased to love her,
and now I love you. I love who I like! The power is mine, she's under
me. That's where I keep her. [Points to his feet] A pity we've no
concertina. [Sings].

        "We have loaves on the stoves,
         We have porridge on the shelf.
         So we'll live and be gay,
         Making merry every day,
         And when death comes,
         Then we'll die!
         We have loaves on the stoves,
         We have porridge on the shelf ..."

    Enter Mítritch. He takes off his outdoor things and climbs on the
    oven.

MÍTRITCH. Seems the women have been fighting again! Tearing each other's
hair. Oh Lord, gracious Nicholas!

AKÍM [sitting on the edge of the oven, takes his leg-bands and shoes and
begins putting them on] Get in, get into the corner.

MÍTRITCH. Seems they can't settle matters between them. Oh Lord!

NIKÍTA. Get out the liquor, we'll have some with our tea.

NAN [to Akoulína] Sister, the samovár is just boiling over.

NIKÍTA. And where's your mother?

NAN. She's standing and crying out there in the passage.

NIKÍTA. Oh, that's it! Call her, and tell her to bring the samovár. And
you, Akoulína, get the tea things.

AKOULÍNA. The tea things? All right. [Brings the things].

NIKÍTA [unpacks spirits, rusks, and salt herrings] That's for myself.
This is yarn for the wife. The paraffin is out there in the passage, and
here's the money. Wait a bit, [takes a counting-frame] I'll add it up.
[Adds] Wheat-flour, 80 kopéykas, oil ... Father, 10 roubles.... Father,
come let's have some tea!

    Silence. Akím sits on the oven and winds the bands round his legs.
    Enter Anísya with samovár.

ANÍSYA. Where shall I put it?

NIKÍTA. Here on the table. Well! have you been to the Elder? Ah, that's
it! Have your say and then eat your words. Now then, that's enough.
Don't be cross, sit down and drink this. [Fills a wine-glass for her]
And here's your present. [Gives her the parcel he had been sitting on.
Anísya takes it silently and shakes her head].

AKÍM [gets down and puts on his sheepskin, then comes up to the table
and puts down the money] Here, take your money back! Put it away.

NIKÍTA [does not see the money] Why have you put on your things?

AKÍM. I'm going, going I mean; forgive me for the Lord's sake. [Takes up
his cap and belt].

NIKÍTA. My gracious! Where are you going to at this time of night?

AKÍM. I can't, I mean what d'ye call 'em, in your house, what d'ye call
'em, can't stay I mean, stay, can't stay, forgive me.

NIKÍTA. But are you going without having any tea?

AKÍM [fastens his belt] Going, because, I mean, it's not right in your
house, I mean, what d'you call it, not right, Nikíta, in the house, what
d'ye call it, not right! I mean, you are living a bad life, Nikíta,
bad,--I'll go.

NIKÍTA. Eh now! Have done talking! Sit down and drink your tea!

ANÍSYA. Why, father, you'll shame us before the neighbours. What has
offended you?

AKÍM. Nothing what d'ye call it, nothing has offended me, nothing at
all! I mean only, I see, what d'you call it, I mean, I see my son, to
ruin I mean, to ruin, I mean my son's on the road to ruin, I mean.

NIKÍTA. What ruin? Just prove it!

AKÍM. Ruin, ruin; you're in the midst of it! What did I tell you that
time?

NIKÍTA. You said all sorts of things!

AKÍM. I told you, what d'ye call it, I told you about the orphan lass.
That you had wronged an orphan--Marína, I mean, wronged her!

NIKÍTA. Eh! he's at it again. Let bygones be bygones ... All that's
past!

AKÍM [excited] Past! No, lad, it's not past. Sin, I mean, fastens on to
sin--drags sin after it, and you've stuck fast, Nikíta, fast in sin!
Stuck fast in sin! I see you're fast in sin. Stuck fast, sunk in sin, I
mean!

NIKÍTA. Sit down and drink your tea, and have done with it!

AKÍM. I can't, I mean can't what d'ye call it, can't drink tea. Because
of your filth, I mean; I feel what d'ye call it, I feel sick, very sick!
I can't what d'ye call it, I can't drink tea with you.

NIKÍTA. Eh! There he goes rambling! Come to the table.

AKÍM. You're in your riches same as in a net--you're in a net, I mean.
Ah, Nikíta, it's the soul that God needs!

NIKÍTA. Now really, what right have you to reprove me in my own house?
Why do you keep on at me? Am I a child that you can pull by the hair?
Nowadays those things have been dropped!

AKÍM. That's true. I have heard that nowadays, what d'ye call it, that
nowadays children pull their fathers' beards, I mean! But that's ruin,
that's ruin, I mean!

NIKÍTA [angrily] We are living without help from you, and it's you who
came to us with your wants!

AKÍM. The money? There's your money! I'll go begging, begging I mean,
before I'll take it, I mean.

NIKÍTA. That's enough! Why be angry and upset the whole company! [Holds
him by the arm].

AKÍM [shrieks] Let go! I'll not stay. I'd rather sleep under some fence
than in the midst of your filth! Faugh! God forgive me! [Exit].

NIKÍTA. Here's a go!

AKÍM [reopens the door] Come to your senses, Nikíta! It's the soul that
God wants! [Exit].

AKOULÍNA [takes cups] Well, shall I pour out the tea? [Takes a cup. All
are silent].

MÍTRITCH [roars] Oh Lord, be merciful to me a sinner! [All start].

NIKÍTA [lies down on the bench] Oh, it's dull, it's dull! [To Akoulína]
Where's the concertina?

AKOULÍNA. The concertina? He's bethought himself of it. Why, you took it
to be mended. I've poured out your tea. Drink it!

NIKÍTA. I don't want it! Put out the light ... Oh, how dull I feel, how
dull! [Sobs].


                                Curtain.




ACT IV

    Autumn. Evening. The moon is shining. The stage represents the
    interior of courtyard. The scenery at the back shows, in the middle,
    the back porch of the hut. To the right the winter half of the hut
    and the gate; to the left the summer half and the cellar. To the
    right of the stage is a shed. The sound of tipsy voices and shouts
    are heard from the hut.[5] Second Neighbour Woman comes out of the
    hut and beckons to First Neighbour Woman.

  [5] Where not otherwise mentioned in the stage directions, it is
  always the winter half of the hut that is referred to as "the hut."
  The summer half is not heated, and not used in winter under ordinary
  circumstances.


SECOND NEIGHBOUR. How's it Akoulína has not shown herself?

FIRST NEIGHBOUR. Why hasn't she shown herself? She'd have been glad to;
but she's too ill, you know. The suitor's relatives have come, and want
to see the girl; and she, my dear, she's lying in the cold hut and can't
come out, poor thing!

SECOND NEIGHBOUR. But how's that?

FIRST NEIGHBOUR. They say she's been bewitched by an evil eye! She's got
pains in the stomach!

SECOND NEIGHBOUR. You don't say so?

FIRST NEIGHBOUR. What else could it be? [Whispers].

SECOND NEIGHBOUR. Dear me! There's a go! But his relatives will surely
find it out?

FIRST NEIGHBOUR. They find it out! They're all drunk! Besides, they are
chiefly after her dowry. Just think what they give with the girl! Two
furs, my dear, six dresses, a French shawl, and I don't know how many
pieces of linen, and money as well,--two hundred roubles, it's said!

SECOND NEIGHBOUR. That's all very well, but even money can't give much
pleasure in the face of such a disgrace.

FIRST NEIGHBOUR. Hush!... There's his father, I think.

    They cease talking, and go into the hut.

    The Suitor's Father comes out of the hut hiccoughing.

THE FATHER. Oh, I'm all in a sweat. It's awfully hot! Will just cool
myself a bit. [Stands puffing] The Lord only knows what--something is
not right. I can't feel happy.--Well, it's the old woman's affair.

    Enter Matryóna from hut.

MATRYÓNA. And I was just thinking, where's the father? Where's the
father? And here you are, dear friend.... Well, dear friend, the Lord be
thanked! Everything is as honourable as can be! When one's arranging a
match one should not boast. And I have never learnt to boast. But as
you've come about the right business, so with the Lord's help, you'll be
grateful to me all your life! She's a wonderful girl! There's no other
like her in all the district!

THE FATHER. That's true enough, but how about the money?

MATRYÓNA. Don't you trouble about the money! All she had from her father
goes with her. And it's more than one gets easily, as things are
nowadays. Three times fifty roubles!

THE FATHER. We don't complain, but it's for our own child. Naturally we
want to get the best we can.

MATRYÓNA. I'll tell you straight, friend: if it hadn't been for me,
you'd never have found anything like her! They've had an offer from the
Karmílins, but I stood out against it. And as for the money, I'll tell
you truly: when her father, God be merciful to his soul, was dying, he
gave orders that the widow should take Nikíta into the homestead--of
course I know all about it from my son,--and the money was to go to
Akoulína. Why, another one might have thought of his own interests, but
Nikíta gives everything clean! It's no trifle. Fancy what a sum it is!

THE FATHER. People are saying, that more money was left her? The lad's
sharp too!

MATRYÓNA. Oh, dear soul alive! A slice in another's hand always looks
big; all she had will be handed over. I tell you, throw doubts to the
wind and make all sure! What a girl she is! as fresh as a daisy!

THE FATHER. That's so. But my old woman and I were only wondering about
the girl; why has she not come out? We've been thinking, suppose she's
sickly?

MATRYÓNA. Oh, ah.... Who? She? Sickly? Why, there's none to compare with
her in the district. The girl's as sound as a bell; you can't pinch her.
But you saw her the other day! And as for work, she's wonderful! She's a
bit deaf, that's true, but there are spots on the sun, you know. And her
not coming out, you see, it's from an evil eye! A spell's been cast on
her! And I know the bitch who's done the business! They know of the
betrothal and they bewitched her. But I know a counter-spell. The girl
will get up to-morrow. Don't you worry about the girl!

THE FATHER. Well, of course, the thing's settled.

MATRYÓNA. Yes, of course! Don't you turn back. And don't forget me, I've
had a lot of trouble. Don't forget ...

    A woman's voice from the hut.

VOICE. If we are to go, let's go. Come along, Iván!

THE FATHER. I'm coming. [Exeunt. Guests crowd together in the passage
and prepare to go away].

NAN [runs out of the hut and calls to Anísya] Mother!

ANÍSYA [from inside] What d'you want?

NAN. Mother, come here, or they'll hear.

    Anísya enters and they go together to the shed.

ANÍSYA. Well? What is it? Where's Akoulína?

NAN. She's gone into the barn. It's awful what's she's doing there! I'm
blest! "I can't bear it," she says. "I'll scream," she says, "I'll
scream out loud." Blest if she didn't.

ANÍSYA. She'll have to wait. We'll see our visitors off first.

NAN. Oh mother! She's so bad! And she's angry too. "What's the good of
their drinking my health?" she says. "I shan't marry," she says. "I
shall die," she says. Mother, supposing she does die! It's awful. I'm so
frightened!

ANÍSYA. No fear, she'll not die. But don't you go near her. Come along.
[Exit Anísya and Nan].

MÍTRITCH [comes in at the gate and begins collecting the scattered hay]
Oh Lord! Merciful Nicholas! What a lot of liquor they've been and
swilled, and the smell they've made! It smells even out here! But no, I
don't want any, drat it! See how they've scattered the hay about. They
don't eat it, but only trample it under foot. A truss gone before you
know it. Oh, that smell, it seems to be just under my nose! Drat it!
[Yawns] It's time to go to sleep! But I don't care to go into the hut.
It seems to float just round my nose! It has a strong scent, the damned
stuff! [The guests are heard driving off] They're off at last. Oh Lord!
Merciful Nicholas! There they go, binding themselves and gulling one
another. And it's all gammon!

    Enter Nikíta.

NIKÍTA. Mítritch, you get off to sleep and I'll put this straight.

MÍTRITCH. All right, you throw it to the sheep. Well, have you seen 'em
all off?

NIKÍTA. Yes, they're off! But things are not right! I don't know what to
do!

MÍTRITCH. It's a fine mess. But there's the Foundlings'[6] for that sort
of thing. Whoever likes may drop one there; they'll take 'em all. Give
'em as many as you like, they ask no questions, and even pay--if the
mother goes in as a wet-nurse. It's easy enough nowadays.

  [6] The Foundlings' Hospital in Moscow, where 80 to 90 per cent. of
  the children die.

NIKÍTA. But mind, Mítritch, don't go blabbing.

MÍTRITCH. It's no concern of mine. Cover the tracks as you think best.
Dear me, how you smell of liquor! I'll go in. Oh Lord! [Exit, yawning].

    Nikíta is long silent. Sits down on a sledge.

NIKÍTA. Here's a go!

    Enter Anísya.

ANÍSYA. Where are you?

NIKÍTA. Here.

ANÍSYA. What are you doing there? There's no time to be lost! We must
take it out directly!

NIKÍTA. What are we to do?

ANÍSYA. I'll tell you what you are to do. And you'll have to do it!

NIKÍTA. You'd better take it to the Foundlings'--if anything.

ANÍSYA. Then you'd better take it there yourself if you like! You've a
hankering for smut, but you're weak when it comes to settling up, I see!

NIKÍTA. What's to be done?

ANÍSYA. Go down into the cellar, I tell you, and dig a hole!

NIKÍTA. Couldn't you manage, somehow, some other way?

ANÍSYA [imitating him] "Some other way?" Seems we can't "some other
way!" You should have thought about it a year ago. Do what you're told
to!

NIKÍTA. Oh dear, what a go!

    Enter Nan.

NAN. Mother! Grandmother's calling! I think sister's got a baby! I'm
blest if it didn't scream!

ANÍSYA. What are you babbling about? Plague take you! It's kittens
whining there. Go into the hut and sleep, or I'll give it you!

NAN. Mammy dear, truly, I swear ...

ANÍSYA [raising her arm as if to strike] I'll give it you! You be off
and don't let me catch sight of you! [Nan runs into hut. To Nikíta] Do
as you're told, or else mind! [Exit].

NIKÍTA [alone. After a long silence] Here's a go! Oh these women! What a
fix! Says you should have thought of it a year ago. When's one to think
beforehand? When's one to think? Why, last year this Anísya dangled
after me. What was I to do? Am I a monk? The master died; and I covered
my sin as was proper, so I was not to blame there. Aren't there lots of
such cases? And then those powders. Did I put her up to that? Why, had I
known what the bitch was up to, I'd have killed her! I'm sure I should
have killed her! She's made me her partner in these horrors--that jade!
And she became loathsome to me from that day! She became loathsome,
loathsome to me as soon as mother told me about it. I can't bear the
sight of her! Well then, how could I live with her? And then it
begun.... That wench began hanging round. Well, what was I to do! If I
had not done it, someone else would. And this is what comes of it! Still
I'm not to blame in this either. Oh, what a go! [Sits thinking] They are
bold, these women! What a plan to think of! But I won't have a hand in
it!

    Enter Matryóna with a lantern and spade, panting.

MATRYÓNA. Why are you sitting there like a hen on a perch? What did your
wife tell you to do? You just get things ready!

NIKÍTA. What do you mean to do?

MATRYÓNA. We know what to do. You do your share!

NIKÍTA. You'll be getting me into a mess!

MATRYÓNA. What? You're not thinking of backing out, are you? Now it's
come to this, and you back out!

NIKÍTA. Think what a thing it would be! It's a living soul.

MATRYÓNA. A living soul indeed! Why, it's more dead than alive. And
what's one to do with it? Go and take it to the Foundlings'--it will die
just the same, and the rumour will get about, and people will talk, and
the girl be left on our hands.

NIKÍTA. And supposing it's found out?

MATRYÓNA. Not manage to do it in one's own house? We'll manage it so
that no one will have an inkling. Only do as I tell you. We women can't
do it without a man. There, take the spade, and get it done there,--I'll
hold the light.

NIKÍTA. What am I to get done?

MATRYÓNA [in a low voice] Dig a hole; then we'll bring it out and get it
out of the way in a trice! There, she's calling again. Now then, get in,
and I'll go.

NIKÍTA. Is it dead then?

MATRYÓNA. Of course it is. Only you must be quick, or else people will
notice! They'll see or they'll hear! The rascals must needs know
everything. And the policeman went by this evening. Well then, you see
[gives him the spade], you get down into the cellar and dig a hole right
in the corner; the earth is soft there, and you'll smooth it over.
Mother earth will not blab to any one; she'll keep it close. Go then;
go, dear.

NIKÍTA. You'll get me into a mess, bother you! I'll go away! You do it
alone as best you can!

ANÍSYA [through the doorway] Well? Has he dug it?

MATRYÓNA. Why have you come away? What have you done with it?

ANÍSYA. I've covered it with rags. No one can hear it. Well, has he dug
it?

MATRYÓNA. He doesn't want to!

ANÍSYA [springs out enraged] Doesn't want to! How will he like feeding
vermin in prison! I'll go straight away and tell everything to the
police! It's all the same if one must perish. I'll go straight and tell!

NIKÍTA [taken aback] What will you tell?

ANÍSYA. What? Everything! Who took the money? You! [Nikíta is silent]
And who gave the poison? I did! But you knew! You knew! You knew! We
were in agreement!

MATRYÓNA. That's enough now. Nikíta dear, why are you obstinate? What's
to be done now? One must take some trouble. Go, honey.

ANÍSYA. See the fine gentleman! He doesn't like it! You've put upon me
long enough! You've trampled me under foot! Now it's my turn! Go, I tell
you, or else I'll do what I said.... There, take the spade; there, now
go!

NIKÍTA. Drat you! Can't you leave a fellow alone! [Takes the spade, but
shrinks] If I don't choose to, I'll not go!

ANÍSYA. Not go? [Begins to shout] Neighbours! Heh! heh!

MATRYÓNA [closes her mouth] What are you about? You're mad! He'll go....
Go, sonnie; go, my own.

ANÍSYA. I'll cry murder!

NIKÍTA. Now stop! Oh what people! You'd better be quick.... As well be
hung for a sheep as a lamb! [Goes towards the cellar].

MATRYÓNA. Yes, that's just it, honey. If you know how to amuse yourself,
you must know how to hide the consequences.

ANÍSYA [still excited] He's trampled on me ... he and his slut! But it's
enough! I'm not going to be the only one! Let him also be a murderer!
Then he'll know how it feels!

MATRYÓNA. There, there! How she flares up! Don't you be cross, lass, but
do things quietly little by little, as it's best. You go to the girl,
and he'll do the work. [Follows Nikíta to the cellar with a lantern. He
descends into the cellar].

ANÍSYA. And I'll make him strangle his dirty brat! [Still excited] I've
worried myself to death all alone, with Peter's bones weighing on my
mind! Let him feel it too! I'll not spare myself; I've said I'll not
spare myself!

NIKÍTA [from the cellar] Show a light!

MATRYÓNA [holds up the lantern to him. To Anísya] He's digging. Go and
bring it.

ANÍSYA. You stay with him, or he'll go away, the wretch! And I'll go and
bring it.

MATRYÓNA. Mind, don't forget to baptize it, or I will if you like. Have
you a cross?

ANÍSYA. I'll find one. I know how to do it. [Exit].

    See at end of Act, Variation, which may be used instead of the
    following.

MATRYÓNA. How the woman bristled up! But one must allow she's been put
upon. Well, but with the Lord's help, when we've covered this business,
there'll be an end of it. We'll shove the girl off without any trouble.
My son will live in comfort. The house, thank God, is as full as an egg.
They'll not forget me either. Where would they have been without
Matryóna? They'd not have known how to contrive things. [Peering into
the cellar] Is it ready, sonnie?

NIKÍTA [puts out his head] What are you about there? Bring it quick!
What are you dawdling for? If it is to be done, let it be done.

MATRYÓNA [goes towards door of the hut and meets Anísya. Anísya comes
out with a baby wrapped in rags] Well, have you baptized it?

ANÍSYA. Why, of course! It was all I could do to take it away--she
wouldn't give it up! [Comes forward and hands it to Nikíta].

NIKÍTA [does not take it] You bring it yourself!

ANÍSYA. Take it, I tell you! [Throws the baby to him].

NIKÍTA [catches it] It's alive! Gracious me, it's moving! It's alive!
What am I to ...

ANÍSYA [snatches the baby from him and throws it into the cellar] Be
quick and smother it, and then it won't be alive! [Pushes Nikíta down]
It's your doing, and you must finish it.

MATRYÓNA [sits on the doorstep of the hut] He's tender-hearted. It's
hard on him, poor dear. Well, what of that? Isn't it also his sin?

    Anísya stands by the cellar.

MATRYÓNA [sits looking at her and discourses] Oh, oh, oh! How frightened
he was: well, but what of that? If it _is_ hard, it's the only thing to
be done. Where was one to put it? And just think, how often it happens
that people pray to God to have children! But no, God gives them none;
or they are all still-born. Look at our priest's wife now.... And here,
where it's not wanted, here it lives. [Looks towards the cellar] I
suppose he's finished. [To Anísya] Well?

ANÍSYA [looking into the cellar] He's put a board on it and is sitting
on it. It must be finished!

MATRYÓNA. Oh, oh! One would be glad not to sin, but what's one to do?

    Re-enter Nikíta from cellar, trembling all over.

NIKÍTA. It's still alive! I can't! It's alive!

ANÍSYA. If it's alive, where are you off to? [Tries to stop him].

NIKÍTA [rushes at her] Go away! I'll kill you! [Catches hold of her
arms; she escapes, he runs after her with the spade. Matryóna runs
towards him and stops him. Anísya runs into the porch. Matryóna tries to
wrench the spade from him. To his mother] I'll kill you! I'll kill you!
Go away! [Matryóna runs to Anísya in the porch. Nikíta stops] I'll kill
you! I'll kill you all!

MATRYÓNA. That's because he's so frightened! Never mind, it will pass!

NIKÍTA. What have they made me do? What have they made me do? How it
whimpered.... How it crunched under me! What have they done with me?...
And it's really alive, still alive! [Listens in silence] It's whimpering
... There, it's whimpering. [Runs to the cellar].

MATRYÓNA [to Anísya] He's going; it seems he means to bury it. Nikíta,
you'd better take the lantern!

NIKÍTA [does not heed her, but listens by the cellar door] I can hear
nothing! I suppose it was fancy! [Moves away, then stops] How the little
bones crunched under me. Krr ... kr ... What have they made me do?
[Listens again] Again whimpering! It's really whimpering! What can it
be? Mother! Mother, I say! [Goes up to her].

MATRYÓNA. What is it, sonnie?

NIKÍTA. Mother, my own mother, I can't do any more! Can't do any more!
My own mother, have some pity on me!

MATRYÓNA. Oh dear, how frightened you are, my darling! Come, come, drink
a drop to give you courage!

NIKÍTA. Mother, mother! It seems my time has come! What have you done
with me? How the little bones crunched, and how it whimpered! My own
mother! What have you done with me? [Steps aside and sits down on the
sledge].

MATRYÓNA. Come, my own, have a drink! It certainly does seem uncanny at
night-time. But wait a bit. When the day breaks, you know, and one day
and another passes, you'll forget even to think of it. Wait a bit; when
the girl's married we'll even forget to think of it. But you go and have
a drink; have a drink! I'll go and put things straight in the cellar
myself.

NIKÍTA [rouses himself] Is there any drink left? Perhaps I can drink it
off! [Exit].

    Anísya, who has stood all the time by the door, silently makes way
    for him.

MATRYÓNA. Go, go, honey, and I'll set to work! I'll go down myself and
dig! Where has he thrown the spade to? [Finds the spade, and goes down
into the cellar] Anísya, come here! Hold the light, will you?

ANÍSYA. And what of him?

MATRYÓNA. He's so frightened! You've been too hard with him. Leave him
alone, he'll come to his senses. God help him! I'll set to work myself.
Put the lantern down here. I can see.

    Matryóna disappears into the cellar.

ANÍSYA [looking towards the door by which Nikíta entered the hut] Well,
have you had enough spree? You've been puffing yourself up, but now
you'll know how it feels! You'll lose some of your bluster!

NIKÍTA [rushes out of the hut towards the cellar] Mother! mother, I say!

MATRYÓNA [puts out her head] What is it, sonnie?

NIKÍTA [listening] Don't bury it, it's alive! Don't you hear? Alive!
There--it's whimpering! There ... quite plain!

MATRYÓNA. How can it whimper? Why, you've flattened it into a pancake!
The whole head is smashed to bits!

NIKÍTA. What is it then? [Stops his ears] It's still whimpering! I am
lost! Lost! What have they done with me?... Where shall I go? [Sits down
on the step].


                                Curtain.


VARIATION

    Instead of the end of Act IV. (from the words, "ANÍSYA. I'll find
    one. I know how to do it. [Exit]") the following variation may be
    read, and is the one usually acted.


SCENE 2.

    The interior of the hut as in Act I.

    Nan lies on the bench, and is covered with a coat. Mítritch is
    sitting on the oven smoking.

MÍTRITCH. Dear me! How they've made the place smell! Drat 'em! They've
been spilling the fine stuff. Even tobacco don't get rid of the smell!
It keeps tickling one's nose so. Oh Lord! But it's bedtime, I guess.
[Approaches the lamp to put it out].

NAN [jumps up, and remains sitting up] Daddy dear,[7] don't put it out!

  [7] Nan calls Mítritch "daddy" merely as a term of endearment.

MÍTRITCH. Not put it out? Why?

NAN. Didn't you hear them making a row in the yard? [Listens] D'you
hear, there in the barn again now?

MÍTRITCH. What's that to you? I guess no one's asked you to mind! Lie
down and sleep! And I'll turn down the light. [Turns down lamp].

NAN. Daddy darling! Don't put it right out; leave a little bit if only
as big as a mouse's eye, else it's so frightening!

MÍTRITCH [laughs] All right, all right. [Sits down by her] What's there
to be afraid of?

NAN. How can one help being frightened, daddy! Sister did go on so! She
was beating her head against the box! [Whispers] You know, I know ... a
little baby is going to be born.... It's already born, I think....

MÍTRITCH. Eh, what a little busybody it is! May the frogs kick her! Must
needs know everything. Lie down and sleep! [Nan lies down] That's right!
[Tucks her up] That's right! There now, if you know too much you'll grow
old too soon.

NAN. And you are going to lie on the oven?

MÍTRITCH. Well, of course! What a little silly you are, now I come to
look at you! Must needs know everything. [Tucks her up again, then
stands up to go] There now, lie still and sleep! [Goes up to the oven].

NAN. It gave just one cry, and now there's nothing to be heard.

MÍTRITCH. Oh Lord! Gracious Nicholas! What is it you can't hear?

NAN. The baby.

MÍTRITCH. There is none, that's why you can't hear it.

NAN. But I heard it! Blest if I didn't hear it! Such a thin voice!

MÍTRITCH. Heard indeed! Much you heard! Well, if you know,--why then it
was just such a little girl as you that the bogey popped into his bag
and made off with.

NAN. What bogey?

MÍTRITCH. Why, just his very self! [Climbs up on to the oven] The oven
is beautifully warm to-night. Quite a treat! Oh Lord! Gracious Nicholas!

NAN. Daddy! are you going to sleep?

MÍTRITCH. What else? Do you think I'm going to sing songs?

    Silence.

NAN. Daddy! Daddy, I say! They are digging! they're digging--don't you
hear? Blest if they're not, they're digging!

MÍTRITCH. What are you dreaming about? Digging! Digging in the night!
Who's digging? The cow's rubbing herself, that's all. Digging indeed! Go
to sleep I tell you, else I'll just put out the light!

NAN. Daddy darling, don't put it out! I won't ... truly, truly, I won't.
It's so frightful!

MÍTRITCH. Frightful? Don't be afraid and then it won't be frightful.
Look at her, she's afraid, and then says it's frightful. How can it help
being frightful if you are afraid? Eh, what a stupid little girl!

    Silence. The cricket chirps.

NAN [whispers] Daddy! I say, daddy! Are you asleep?

MÍTRITCH. Now then, what d'you want?

NAN. What's the bogey like?

MÍTRITCH. Why, like this! When he finds such a one as you, who won't
sleep, he comes with a sack and pops the girl into it, then in he gets
himself, head and all, lifts her dress, and gives her a fine whipping!

NAN. What with?

MÍTRITCH. He takes a birch-broom with him.

NAN. But he can't see there--inside the sack!

MÍTRITCH. He'll see, no fear!

NAN. But I'll bite him.

MÍTRITCH. No, friend, him you can't bite!

NAN. Daddy, there's some one coming! Who is it? Oh gracious goodness!
Who can it be?

MÍTRITCH. Well, if some one's coming, let them come! What's the matter
with you? I suppose it's your mother!

    Enter Anísya.

ANÍSYA. Nan! [Nan pretends to be asleep] Mítritch!

MÍTRITCH. What?

ANÍSYA. What's the lamp burning for? We are going to sleep in the
summer-hut.

MÍTRITCH. Why, you see I've only just got straight. I'll put the light
out all right.

ANÍSYA [rummages in her box and grumbles] When a thing's wanted one
never can find it!

MÍTRITCH. Why, what is it you are looking for?

ANÍSYA. I'm looking for a cross. Suppose it were to die unbaptized! It
would be a sin, you know!

MÍTRITCH. Of course it would! Everything in due order.... Have you found
it?

ANÍSYA. Yes, I've found it. [Exit].

MÍTRITCH. That's right, else I'd have lent her mine. Oh Lord!

NAN [jumps up trembling] Oh, oh, daddy! Don't go to sleep; for goodness'
sake, don't! It's so frightful!

MÍTRITCH. What's frightful?

NAN. It will die--the little baby will! At Aunt Irene's the old woman
also baptized the baby, and it died!

MÍTRITCH. If it dies, they'll bury it!

NAN. But maybe it wouldn't have died, only old Granny Matryóna's there!
Didn't I hear what granny was saying? I heard her! Blest if I didn't!

MÍTRITCH. What did you hear? Go to sleep, I tell you. Cover yourself up,
head and all, and let's have an end of it!

NAN. If it lived, I'd nurse it!

MÍTRITCH [roars] Oh Lord!

NAN. Where will they put it?

MÍTRITCH. In the right place! It's no business of yours! Go to sleep I
tell you, else mother will come; she'll give it you! [Silence].

NAN. Daddy! Eh, daddy! That girl, you know, you were telling about--they
didn't kill her?

MÍTRITCH. That girl? Oh yes. That girl turned out all right!

NAN. How was it? You were saying you found her?

MÍTRITCH. Well, we just found her!

NAN. But where did you find her? Do tell!

MÍTRITCH. Why, in their own house; that's where! We came to a village,
the soldiers began hunting about in the house, when suddenly there's
that same little girl lying on the floor, flat on her stomach. We were
going to give her a knock on the head, but all at once I felt that
sorry, that I took her up in my arms; but no, she wouldn't let me! Made
herself so heavy, quite a hundredweight, and caught hold where she could
with her hands, so that one couldn't get them off! Well, so I began
stroking her head. It was so bristly,--just like a hedgehog! So I
stroked and stroked, and she quieted down at last. I soaked a bit of
rusk and gave it her. She understood that, and began nibbling. What were
we to do with her? We took her; took her, and began feeding and feeding
her, and she got so used to us that we took her with us on the march,
and so she went about with us. Ah, she was a fine girl!

NAN. Yes, and not baptized?

MÍTRITCH. Who can tell! They used to say, not altogether. 'Cos why,
those people weren't our own.

NAN. Germans?

MÍTRITCH. What an idea! Germans! Not Germans, but Asiatics. They are
just the same as Jews, but still not Jews. Polish, yet Asiatics. Curls
... or, Curdlys is their name.... I've forgotten what it is![8] We
called the girl Sáshka. She was a fine girl, Sáshka was! There now, I've
forgotten everything I used to know! But that girl--the deuce take
her--seems to be before my eyes now! Out of all my time of service, I
remember how they flogged me, and I remember that girl. That's all I
remember! She'd hang round one's neck, and one 'ud carry her so. That
was a girl,--if you wanted a better you'd not find one! We gave her away
afterwards. The captain's wife took her to bring up as her daughter.
So--she was all right! How sorry the soldiers were to let her go!

  [8] Probably Kurds.

NAN. There now, daddy, and I remember when father was dying,--you were
not living with us then. Well, he called Nikíta and says, "Forgive me,
Nikíta!" he says, and begins to cry. [Sighs] That also felt very sad!

MÍTRITCH. Yes; there now, so it is ...

NAN. Daddy! Daddy, I say! There they are again, making a noise in the
cellar! Oh gracious heavens! Oh dear! Oh dear! Oh, daddy! They'll do
something to it! They'll make away with it, and it's so little! Oh, oh!
[Covers up her head and cries].

MÍTRITCH [listening] Really they're up to some villainy, blow them to
shivers! Oh, these women are vile creatures! One can't say much for men
either; but women!... They are like wild beasts, and stick at nothing!

NAN [rising] Daddy; I say, daddy!

MÍTRITCH. Well, what now?

NAN. The other day a traveller stayed the night; he said that when an
infant died its soul goes up straight to heaven. Is that true?

MÍTRITCH. Who can tell. I suppose so. Well?

NAN. Oh, it would be best if I died too. [Whimpers].

MÍTRITCH. Then you'd be off the list!

NAN. Up to ten one's an infant, and maybe one's soul would go to God.
Else one's sure to go to the bad!

MÍTRITCH. And how to the bad? How should the likes of you not go to the
bad? Who teaches you? What do you see? What do you hear? Only vileness!
I, though I've not been taught much, still know a thing or two. I'm not
quite like a peasant woman. A peasant woman, what is she? Just mud!
There are many millions of the likes of you in Russia, and all as blind
as moles--knowing nothing! All sorts of spells: how to stop the
cattle-plague with a plough, and how to cure children by putting them
under the perches in the hen-house! That's what they know!

NAN. Yes, mother also did that!

MÍTRITCH. Yes,--there it is,--just so! So many millions of girls and
women, and all like beasts in a forest! As she grows up, so she dies!
Never sees anything; never hears anything. A peasant,--he may learn
something at the pub, or maybe in prison, or in the army,--as I did. But
a woman? Let alone about God, she doesn't even know rightly what Friday
it is! Friday! Friday! But ask her what's Friday? She don't know!
They're like blind puppies, creeping about and poking their noses into
the dung-heap.... All they know are their silly songs. Ho, ho, ho, ho!
But what they mean by ho-ho, they don't know themselves!

NAN. But I, daddy, I do know half the Lord's Prayer!

MÍTRITCH. A lot you know! But what can one expect of you? Who teaches
you? Only a tipsy peasant--with the strap perhaps! That's all the
teaching you get! I don't know who'll have to answer for you. For a
recruit, the drill-sergeant or the corporal has to answer; but for the
likes of you there's no one responsible! Just as the cattle that have no
herdsman are the most mischievous, so with you women--you are the
stupidest class! The most foolish class is yours!

NAN. Then what's one to do?

MÍTRITCH. That's what one has to do.... You just cover up your head and
sleep! Oh Lord!

    Silence. The cricket chirps.

NAN [jumps up] Daddy! Some one's screaming awfully! Blest if some one
isn't screaming! Daddy darling, it's coming here!

MÍTRITCH. Cover up your head, I tell you!

    Enter Nikíta, followed by Matryóna.

NIKÍTA. What have they done with me? What have they done with me?

MATRYÓNA. Have a drop, honey; have a drop of drink! What's the matter?
[Fetches the spirits and sets the bottle before him].

NIKÍTA. Give it here! Perhaps the drink will help me!

MATRYÓNA. Mind! They're not asleep! Here you are, have a drop!

NIKÍTA. What does it all mean? Why did you plan it? You might have taken
it somewhere!

MATRYÓNA [whispers] Sit still a bit and drink a little more, or have a
smoke. It will ease your thoughts!

NIKÍTA. My own mother! My turn seems to have come! How it began to
whimper, and how the little bones crunched ... krr ... I'm not a man
now!

MATRYÓNA. Eh, now, what's the use of talking so silly! Of course it does
seem fearsome at night, but wait till the daylight comes, and a day or
two passes, and you'll forget to think of it! [Goes up to Nikíta and
puts her hand on his shoulder].

NIKÍTA. Go away from me! What have you done with me?

MATRYÓNA. Come, come, sonnie! Now really, what's the matter with you?
[Takes his hand].

NIKÍTA. Go away from me! I'll kill you! It's all one to me now! I'll
kill you!

MATRYÓNA. Oh, oh, how frightened he's got! You should go and have a
sleep now!

NIKÍTA. I have nowhere to go; I'm lost!

MATRYÓNA [shaking her head] Oh, oh, I'd better go and tidy things up.
He'll sit and rest a bit, and it will pass! [Exit].

    Nikíta sits with his face in his hands. Mítritch and Nan seem
    stunned.

NIKÍTA. It's whining! It's whining! It is really--there, there, quite
plain! She'll bury it, really she will! [Runs to the door] Mother, don't
bury it, it's alive....

    Enter Matryóna.

MATRYÓNA [whispers] Now then, what is it? Heaven help you! Why won't you
get to rest? How can it be alive? All its bones are crushed!

NIKÍTA. Give me more drink! [Drinks].

MATRYÓNA. Now go, sonnie. You'll fall asleep now all right.

NIKÍTA [stands listening] Still alive ... there ... it's whining! Don't
you hear?... There!

MATRYÓNA [whispers] No! I tell you!

NIKÍTA. Mother! My own mother! I've ruined my life! What have you done
with me? Where am I to go? [Runs out of the hut; Matryóna follows him].

NAN. Daddy dear, darling, they've smothered it!

MÍTRITCH [angrily] Go to sleep, I tell you! Oh dear, may the frogs kick
you! I'll give it to you with the broom! Go to sleep, I tell you!

NAN. Daddy, my treasure! Something is catching hold of my shoulders,
something is catching hold with its paws! Daddy dear ... really, really
... I must go! Daddy, darling! let me get up on the oven with you! Let
me, for Heaven's sake! Catching hold ... catching hold! Oh! [Runs to the
stove].

MÍTRITCH. See how they've frightened the girl.... What vile creatures
they are! May the frogs kick them! Well then, climb up.

NAN [climbs on oven] But don't you go away!

MÍTRITCH. Where should I go to? Climb up, climb up! Oh Lord! Gracious
Nicholas! Holy Mother!... How they have frighted the girl. [Covers her
up] There's a little fool--really a little fool! How they've frighted
her; really, they are vile creatures! The deuce take 'em!


                                Curtain.




ACT V


SCENE 1.

    In front of scene a stack-stand, to the left a thrashing ground, to
    the right a barn. The barn doors are open. Straw is strewn about in
    the doorway. The hut with yard and out-buildings is seen in the
    background, whence proceed sounds of singing and of a tambourine.
    Two Girls are walking past the barn towards the hut.

FIRST GIRL. There, you see we've managed to pass without so much as
getting our boots dirty! But to come by the street is terribly muddy!
[Stop and wipe their boots on the straw. First Girl looks at the straw
and sees something] What's that?

SECOND GIRL [looks where the straw lies and sees some one] It's
Mítritch, their labourer. Just look how drunk he is!

FIRST GIRL. Why, I thought he didn't drink.

SECOND GIRL. It seems he didn't, until it was going around.

FIRST GIRL. Just see! He must have come to fetch some straw. Look! he's
got a rope in his hand, and he's fallen asleep.

SECOND GIRL [listening] They're still singing the praises.[9] So I
s'pose the bride and bridegroom have not yet been blessed! They say
Akoulína didn't even lament![10]

  [9] This refers to the songs customary at the wedding of Russian
  peasants, praising the bride and bridegroom.

  [10] It is etiquette for a bride to bewail the approaching loss of her
  maidenhood.

FIRST GIRL. Mammie says she is marrying against her will. Her
stepfather threatened her, or else she'd not have done it for the world!
Why, you know what they've been saying about her?

MARÍNA [catching up the Girls] How d'you do, lassies?

GIRLS. How d'you do?

MARÍNA. Going to the wedding, my dears?

FIRST GIRL. It's nearly over! We've come just to have a look.

MARÍNA. Would you call my old man for me? Simon, from Zoúevo; but surely
you know him?

FIRST GIRL. To be sure we do; he's a relative of the bridegroom's, I
think?

MARÍNA. Of course; he's my old man's nephew, the bridegroom is.

SECOND GIRL. Why don't you go yourself? Fancy not going to a wedding!

MARÍNA. I have no mind for it, and no time either. It's time for us to
be going home. We didn't mean to come to the wedding. We were taking
oats to town. We only stopped to feed the horse, and they made my old
man go in.

FIRST GIRL. Where did you put up then? At Fyódoritch's?

MARÍNA. Yes. Well then, I'll stay here and you go and call him, my
dear--my old man. Call him, my pet, and say "Your missis, Marína, says
you must go now!" His mates are harnessing.

FIRST GIRL. Well, all right--if you won't go in yourself.

    The Girls go away towards the house along a footpath. Sounds of
    songs and tambourine.

MARÍNA [alone, stands thinking] I might go in, but I don't like to,
because I have not met him since that day he threw me over. It's more
than a year now. But I'd have liked to have a peep and see how he lives
with his Anísya. People say they don't get on. She's a coarse woman, and
with a character of her own. I should think he's remembered me more
than once. He's been caught by the idea of a comfortable life and has
changed me for it. But, God help him, I don't cherish ill-will! Then it
hurt! Oh dear, it was pain! But now it's worn away and been forgotten.
But I'd like to have seen him. [Looks towards hut and sees Nikíta] Look
there! Why, he is coming here! Have the girls told him? How's it he has
left his guests? I'll go away! [Nikíta approaches, hanging his head
down, swinging his arms, and muttering] And how sullen he looks!

NIKÍTA [sees and recognises Marína] Marína, dearest friend, little
Marína, what do you want?

MARÍNA. I have come for my old man.

NIKÍTA. Why didn't you come to the wedding? You might have had a look
round, and a laugh at my expense!

MARÍNA. What have I to laugh at? I've come for my husband.

NIKÍTA. Ah, Marína dear! [Tries to embrace her].

MARÍNA [steps angrily aside] You'd better drop that sort of thing,
Nikíta! What has been, is past! I've come for my husband. Is he in your
house?

NIKÍTA. So I must not remember the past? You won't let me?

MARÍNA. It's no use recalling the past! What used to be is over now!

NIKÍTA. And can never come back, you mean?

MARÍNA. And will never come back! But why have you gone away? You, the
master,--and to go away from the feast!

NIKÍTA [sits down on the straw] Why have I gone away? Eh, if you knew,
if you had any idea ... I'm dull, Marína, so dull that I wish my eyes
would not see! I rose from the table and left them, to get away from the
people. If I could only avoid seeing any one!

MARÍNA [coming nearer to him] How's that?

NIKÍTA. This is how it is: when I eat, it's there! When I drink, it's
there! When I sleep, it's there! I'm so sick of it--so sick! But it's
chiefly because I'm all alone that I'm so sick, little Marína. I have no
one to share my trouble.

MARÍNA. You can't live your life without trouble, Nikíta. However, I've
wept over mine and wept it away.

NIKÍTA. The former, the old trouble! Ah, dear friend, you've wept yours
away, and I've got mine up to there! [Puts his hand to his throat].

MARÍNA. But why?

NIKÍTA. Why, I'm sick of my whole life! I am sick of myself! Ah, Marína,
why did you not know how to keep me? You've ruined me, and yourself too!
Is this life?

MARÍNA [stands by the barn crying, but restrains herself] I do not
complain of my life, Nikíta! God grant every one a life like mine. I do
not complain. I confessed to my old man at the time, and he forgave me.
And he does not reproach me. I'm not discontented with my life. The old
man is quiet, and is fond of me, and I keep his children clothed and
washed! He is really kind to me. Why should I complain? It seems God
willed it so. And what's the matter with your life? You are rich ...

NIKÍTA. My life!... It's only that I don't wish to disturb the wedding
feast, or I'd take this rope here [takes hold of the rope on the straw]
and throw it across that rafter there. Then I'd make a noose and stretch
it out, and I'd climb on to that rafter and jump down with my head in
the noose! That's what my life is!

MARÍNA. That's enough! Lord help you!

NIKÍTA. You think I'm joking? You think I'm drunk? I'm not drunk! To-day
even drink takes no hold on me! I'm devoured by misery! Misery is eating
me up completely, so that I care for nothing! Oh, little Marína, it's
only with you I ever lived! Do you remember how we used to while away
the nights together at the railway?

MARÍNA. Don't you rub the sores, Nikíta! I'm bound legally now, and you
too. My sin has been forgiven, don't disturb ...

NIKÍTA. What shall I do with my heart? Where am I to turn to?

MARÍNA. What's there to be done? You've got a wife. Don't go looking at
others, but keep to your own! You loved Anísya, then go on loving her!

NIKÍTA. Oh, that Anísya, she's gall and wormwood to me, but she's round
my feet like rank weeds!

MARÍNA. Whatever she is, still she's your wife.... But what's the use of
talking; you'd better go to your visitors, and send my husband to me.

NIKÍTA. Oh dear, if you knew the whole business ... but there's no good
talking!

    Enter Marína's husband, red and tipsy, and Nan.

MARÍNA'S HUSBAND. Marína! Missis! My old woman! are you here?

NIKÍTA. There's your husband calling you. Go!

MARÍNA. And you?

NIKÍTA. I? I'll lie down here for a bit! [Lies down on the straw].

HUSBAND. Where is she then?

NAN. There she is, near the barn.

HUSBAND. What are you standing there for? Come to the feast! The hosts
want you to come and do them honour! The wedding party is just going to
start, and then we can go too.

MARÍNA [going towards her husband] I didn't want to go in.

HUSBAND. Come on, I tell you! You'll drink a glass to our nephew Peter's
health, the rascal! Else the hosts might take offence! There's plenty of
time for our business. [Marína's husband puts his arm around her, and
goes reeling out with her].

NIKÍTA [rises and sits down on the straw] Ah, now that I've seen her,
life seems more sickening than ever! It was only with her that I ever
really lived! I've ruined my life for nothing! I've done for myself!
[Lies down] Where can I go? If mother earth would but open and swallow
me!

NAN [sees Nikíta, and runs towards him] Daddy, I say, daddy! They're
looking for you! Her godfather and all of them have already blessed her.
Truly they have, they're getting cross!

NIKÍTA [aside] Where can I go to?

NAN. What? What are you saying?

NIKÍTA. I'm not saying anything! Don't bother!

NAN. Daddy! Come, I say! [Nikíta is silent, Nan pulls him by the hand]
Dad, go and bless them! My word, they're angry, they're grumbling!

NIKÍTA [drags away his hand] Leave me alone!

NAN. Now then!

NIKÍTA [threatens her with the rope] Go, I say! I'll give it you!

NAN. Then I'll send mother! [Runs away].

NIKÍTA [rises] How can I go? How can I take the holy icón in my hands?
How am I to look her in the face! [Lies down again] Oh, if there were a
hole in the ground, I'd jump in! No one should see me, and I should see
no one! [Rises again] No, I shan't go ... May they all go to the devil,
I shan't go! [Takes the rope and makes a noose, and tries it on his
neck] That's the way!

    Enter Matryóna. Nikíta sees his mother, takes the rope off his neck,
    and again lies down in the straw.

MATRYÓNA [comes in hurriedly] Nikíta! Nikíta, I say! He don't even
answer! Nikíta, what's the matter? Have you had a drop too much? Come,
Nikíta dear; come, honey! The people are tired of waiting.

NIKÍTA. Oh dear, what have you done with me? I'm a lost man!

MATRYÓNA. But what is the matter then? Come, my own; come, give them
your blessing, as is proper and honourable, and then it'll all be over!
Why, the people are waiting!

NIKÍTA. How can I give blessings?

MATRYÓNA. Why, in the usual way! Don't you know?

NIKÍTA. I know, I know! But who is it I am to bless? What have I done to
her?

MATRYÓNA. What have you done? Eh, now he's going to remember it! Why,
who knows anything about it? Not a soul! And the girl is going of her
own accord.

NIKÍTA. Yes, but how?

MATRYÓNA. Because she's afraid, of course. But still she's going.
Besides, what's to be done now? She should have thought sooner! Now she
can't refuse. And his kinsfolk can't take offence either. They saw the
girl twice, and get money with her too! It's all safe and sound!

NIKÍTA. Yes, but what's in the cellar?

MATRYÓNA [laughs] In the cellar? Why, cabbages, mushrooms, potatoes, I
suppose! Why remember the past?

NIKÍTA. I'd be only too glad to forget it; but I can't! When I let my
mind go, it's just as if I heard.... Oh, what have you done with me?

MATRYÓNA. Now, what are you humbugging for?

NIKÍTA [turns face downward] Mother! Don't torment me! I've got it up to
there! [Puts his hand to his throat].

MATRYÓNA. Still it has to be done! As it is, people are talking. "The
master's gone away and won't come; he can't make up his mind to give his
blessing." They'll be putting two and two together. As soon as they see
you're frightened they'll begin guessing. "The thief none suspect who
walks bold and erect!" But you'll be getting out of the frying-pan into
the fire! Above all, lad, don't show it; don't lose courage, else
they'll find out all the more!

NIKÍTA. Oh dear! You have snared me into a trap!

MATRYÓNA. That'll do, I tell you; come along! Come in and give your
blessing, as is right and honourable;--and there's an end of the matter!

NIKÍTA [lies face down] I can't!

MATRYÓNA [aside] What has come over him? He seemed all right, and
suddenly this comes over him! It seems he's bewitched! Get up, Nikíta!
See! There's Anísya coming; she's left her guests!

    Anísya enters, dressed up, red and tipsy.

ANÍSYA. Oh, how nice it is, mother! So nice, so respectable! And how the
people are pleased.... But where is he?

MATRYÓNA. Here, honey, he's here; he's laid down on the straw and there
he lies! He won't come!

NIKÍTA [looking at his wife] Just see, she's tipsy too! When I look at
her my heart seems to turn! How can one live with her? [Turns on his
face] I'll kill her some day! It'll be worse then!

ANÍSYA. Only look, how he's got all among the straw! Is it the drink?
[Laughs] I'd not mind lying down there with you, but I've no time! Come,
I'll lead you! It is so nice in the house! It's a treat to look on! A
concertina! And the women singing so well! All tipsy! Everything so
respectable, so nice!

NIKÍTA. What's nice?

ANÍSYA. The wedding--such a jolly wedding! They all say it's quite an
uncommon fine wedding! All so respectable, so nice! Come along! We'll go
together! I have had a drop, but I can give you a hand yet! [Takes his
hand].

NIKÍTA [pulls it back with disgust] Go alone! I'll come!

ANÍSYA. What are you humbugging for? We've got rid of all the bother,
we've got rid of her as came between us; now we have nothing to do but
to live and be merry! And all so respectable, and quite legal! I'm so
pleased! I have no words for it! It's just as if I were going to marry
you over again! And oh, the people, they _are_ pleased! They're all
thanking us! And the guests are all of the best: Iván Moséitch is there,
and the Police Officer; they've also been singing songs of praise!

NIKÍTA. Then you should have stayed with them! What have you come for?

ANÍSYA. True enough, I must go back! Else what does it look like! The
hosts both go and leave the visitors! And the guests are all of the
best!

NIKÍTA [gets up and brushes the straw off himself] Go, and I'll come at
once!

MATRYÓNA. Just see! He listens to the young bird, but wouldn't listen to
the old one! He would not hear me, but he follows his wife at once!
[Matryóna and Anísya turn to go] Well, are you coming?

NIKÍTA. I'll come directly! You go and I'll follow! I'll come and give
my blessing! [The women stop] Go on! I'll follow! Now then, go! [Exit
women. Sits down and takes his boots off] Yes, I'm going! A likely
thing! No, you'd better look at the rafter for me! I'll fix the noose
and jump with it from the rafter, then you can look for me! And the rope
is here just handy. [Ponders] I'd have got over it, over any sorrow--I'd
have got over that. But this now--here it is, deep in my heart, and I
can't get over it! [Looks towards the yard] Surely she's not coming
back? [Imitates Anísya] "So nice, so nice. I'd lie down here with you."
Oh, the baggage! Well then, here I am! Come and cuddle when they've
taken me down from the rafter! There's only one way! [Takes the rope and
pulls it].

    Mítritch, who is tipsy, sits up and won't let go of the rope.

MÍTRITCH. Shan't give it up! Shan't give it to no one! I'll bring it
myself! I said I'd bring the straw--and so I will! Nikíta, is that you?
[Laughs] Oh, the devil! Have you come to get the straw?

NIKÍTA. Give me the rope!

MÍTRITCH. No, you wait a bit! The peasants sent me! I'll bring it ...
[Rises to his feet and begins getting the straw together, but reels
for a time, then falls] It has beaten me. It's stronger ...

NIKÍTA. Give me the rope!

MÍTRITCH. Didn't I say I won't! Oh, Nikíta, you're as stupid as a hog!
[Laughs] I love you, but you're a fool! You see that I'm drunk ... devil
take you! You think I need you?... You just look at me; I'm a Non ...
fool, can't say it--Non-commissioned Officer of Her Majesty's very First
Regiment of Grenadier Guards! I've served Tsar and country, loyal and
true! But who am I? You think I'm a warrior? No, I'm not a warrior; I'm
the very least of men, a poor lost orphan! I swore not to drink, and now
I had a smoke, and ... Well then, do you think I'm afraid of you? No
fear; I'm afraid of no man! I've taken to drink, and I'll drink! Now
I'll go it for a fortnight; I'll go it hard! I'll drink my last shirt;
I'll drink my cap; I'll pawn my passport; and I'm afraid of no one! They
flogged me in the army to stop me drinking! They switched and switched!
"Well," they say, "will you leave off?" "No," says I! Why should I be
afraid of them? Here I am! Such as I am, God made me! I swore off
drinking, and didn't drink. Now I've took to drink, and I'll drink! And
I fear no man! 'Cos I don't lie; but just as ... Why should one mind
them--such muck as they are! "Here you are," I say; that's me. A priest
told me, the devil's the biggest bragger! "As soon," says he, "as you
begin to brag, you get frightened; and as soon as you fear men, then the
hoofed one just collars you and pushes you where he likes!" But as I
don't fear men, I'm easy! I can spit in the devil's beard, and at the
sow his mother! He can't do me no harm! There, put that in your pipe!

NIKÍTA [crossing himself] True enough! What was I about? [Throws down
the rope].

MÍTRITCH. What?

NIKÍTA [rises] You tell me not to fear men?

MÍTRITCH. Why fear such muck as they are? You look at 'em in the
bath-house! All made of one paste! One has a bigger belly, another a
smaller; that's all the difference there is! Fancy being afraid of 'em!
Deuce take 'em!

  [Illustration: THE POWER OF DARKNESS. ACT V.

  NIKÍTA. True enough! What was I about?

  MÍTRITCH. What?

  NIKÍTA. You tell me not to fear men?

  MÍTRITCH. Why fear such muck as they are? You look at 'em in the
  bath-house!]

MATRYÓNA [from the yard] Well, are you coming?

NIKÍTA. Ah! Better so! I'm coming! [Goes towards yard].


SCENE 2.

    Interior of hut, full of people, some sitting round tables and
    others standing. In the front corner Akoulína and the Bridegroom. On
    one of the tables an Icón and a loaf of rye-bread. Among the
    visitors are Marína, her husband, and a Police Officer, also a Hired
    Driver, the Matchmaker, and the Best Man. The women are singing.
    Anísya carries round the drink. The singing stops.

THE DRIVER. If we are to go, let's go! The church ain't so near.

THE BEST MAN. All right; you wait a bit till the step-father has given
his blessing. But where is he?

ANÍSYA. He is coming--coming at once, dear friends! Have another glass
all of you; don't refuse!

THE MATCHMAKER. Why is he so long? We've been waiting such a time!

ANÍSYA. He's coming; coming directly, coming in no time! He'll be here
before one could plait a girl's hair who's had her hair cropped! Drink,
friends! [Offers the drink] Coming at once! Sing again, my pets,
meanwhile!

THE DRIVER. They've sung all their songs, waiting here!

    The women sing. Nikíta and Akím enter during the singing.

NIKÍTA [holds his father's arm and pushes him in before him] Go, father;
I can't do without you!

AKÍM. I don't like--I mean what d'ye call it ...

NIKÍTA [to the women] Enough! Be quiet! [Looks round the hut] Marína,
are you there?

THE MATCHMAKER. Go, take the icón, and give them your blessing!

NIKÍTA. Wait a while! [Looks round] Akoulína, are you there?

MATCHMAKER. What are you calling everybody for? Where should she be? How
queer he seems!

ANÍSYA. Gracious goodness! Why, he's barefoot!

NIKÍTA. Father, you are here! Look at me! Christian Commune, you are all
here, and I am here! I am ... [Falls on his knees].

ANÍSYA. Nikíta darling, what's the matter with you? Oh my head, my head!

MATCHMAKER. Here's a go!

MATRYÓNA. I did say he was taking too much of that French wine! Come to
your senses; what are you about?

    They try to lift him; he takes no heed of them, but looks in front
    of him.

NIKÍTA. Christian Commune! I have sinned, and I wish to confess!

MATRYÓNA [shakes him by the shoulder] Are you mad? Dear friends, he's
gone crazy! He must be taken away!

NIKÍTA [shakes her off] Leave me alone! And you, father, hear me! And
first, Marína, look here! [Bows to the ground to her and rises] I have
sinned towards you! I promised to marry you, I tempted you, and forsook
you! Forgive me, in Christ's name! [Again bows to the ground before
her].

ANÍSYA. And what are you drivelling about? It's not becoming! No one
wants to know! Get up! It's like your impudence!

MATRYÓNA. Oh, oh, he's bewitched! And however did it happen? It's a
spell! Get up! what nonsense are you jabbering? [Pulls him].

NIKÍTA [shakes his head] Don't touch me! Forgive me my sin towards you,
Marína! Forgive me, for Christ's sake!

    Marína covers her face with her hands in silence.

ANÍSYA. Get up, I tell you! Don't be so impudent! What are you thinking
about--to recall it? Enough humbug! It's shameful! Oh my poor head! He's
quite crazy!

NIKÍTA [pushes his wife away and turns to Akoulína] Akoulína, now I'll
speak to you! Listen, Christian Commune! I'm a fiend, Akoulína! I have
sinned against you! Your father died no natural death! He was poisoned!

ANÍSYA [screams] Oh my head! What's he about?

MATRYÓNA. The man's beside himself! Lead him away!

    The folk come up and try to seize him.

AKÍM [motions them back with his arms] Wait! You lads, what d'ye call
it, wait, I mean!

NIKÍTA. Akoulína, I poisoned him! Forgive me, in Christ's name!

AKOULÍNA [jumps up] He's telling lies! I know who did it!

MATCHMAKER. What are you about? You sit still!

AKÍM. Oh Lord, what sins, what sins!

POLICE OFFICER. Seize him, and send for the Elder! We must draw up an
indictment and have witnesses to it! Get up and come here!

AKÍM [to Police Officer] Now you--with the bright buttons--I mean, you
wait! Let him, what d'ye call it, speak out, I mean!

POLICE OFFICER. Mind, old man, and don't interfere! I have to draw up an
indictment!

AKÍM. Eh, what a fellow you are; wait, I say! Don't talk, I mean, about,
what d'ye call it, 'ditements! Here God's work is being done.... A man
is confessing, I mean! And you, what d'ye call it ... 'ditements!

POLICE OFFICER. The Elder!

AKÍM. Let God's work be done, I mean, and then you, I mean, you do your
business!

NIKÍTA. And, Akoulína, my sin is great towards you; I seduced you;
forgive me in Christ's name! [Bows to the ground before her].

AKOULÍNA [leaves the table] Let me go! I shan't be married! He told me
to, but I shan't now!

POLICE OFFICER. Repeat what you have said.

NIKÍTA. Wait, sir, let me finish!

AKÍM [with rapture] Speak, my son! Tell everything--you'll feel better!
Confess to God, don't fear men! God--God! It is He!

NIKÍTA. I poisoned the father, dog that I am, and I ruined the daughter!
She was in my power, and I ruined her, and her baby!

AKOULÍNA. True, that's true!

NIKÍTA. I smothered the baby in the cellar with a board! I sat on it and
smothered it--and its bones crunched! [Weeps] And I buried it! I did it,
all alone!

AKOULÍNA. He raves! I told him to!

NIKÍTA. Don't shield me! I fear no one now! Forgive me, Christian
Commune! [Bows to the ground].

    Silence.

POLICE OFFICER. Bind him! The marriage is evidently off!

    Men come up with their belts.

NIKÍTA. Wait, there's plenty of time! [Bows to the ground before his
father] Father, dear father, forgive me too,--fiend that I am! You told
me from the first, when I took to bad ways, you said then, "If a claw is
caught, the bird is lost!" I would not listen to your words, dog that I
was, and it has turned out as you said! Forgive me, for Christ's sake!

AKÍM [rapturously] God will forgive you, my own son! [Embraces him] You
have had no mercy on yourself, He will show mercy on you! God--God! It
is He!

    Enter Elder.

ELDER. There are witnesses enough here.

POLICE OFFICER. We will have the examination at once.

    Nikíta is bound.

AKOULÍNA [goes and stands by his side] I shall tell the truth! Ask me!

NIKÍTA [bound] No need to ask! I did it all myself. The design was mine,
and the deed was mine. Take me where you like. I will say no more!


                                Curtain.


                    END OF "THE POWER OF DARKNESS."




[ Transcriber's Note:

  The following is a list of corrections made to the original. The first
  line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

about the lass or about yourself Twist them, I mean, to make it better
about the lass or about yourself. Twist them, I mean, to make it better

daresay the samovár is still hot I'll also go and help a bit.
daresay the samovár is still hot. I'll also go and help a bit.

NIKÍTA. I don't want it! Put out the light . . Oh, how dull I feel, how
NIKÍTA. I don't want it! Put out the light ... Oh, how dull I feel, how

SCENE 1
SCENE 1.

thanking us! And the guests are all of the best: Ivan Moséitch is there,
thanking us! And the guests are all of the best: Iván Moséitch is there,

  MÍTRICH. What?
  MÍTRITCH. What?

  NIKÍTA. You tell me not to fear men.
  NIKÍTA. You tell me not to fear men?

  MÍTRICH. Why fear such muck as they are? You look at 'em in the
  MÍTRITCH. Why fear such muck as they are? You look at 'em in the

ANÍSYA. Nikíta darling, what's the matter with you. Oh my head, my head!
ANÍSYA. Nikíta darling, what's the matter with you? Oh my head, my head!
]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Power of Darkness, by Leo Tolstoy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POWER OF DARKNESS ***

***** This file should be named 26661-8.txt or 26661-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/6/26661/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
