The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tolstoi for the young, by Leo Tolstoi

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Tolstoi for the young
       Select tales from Tolstoi

Author: Leo Tolstoi

Illustrator: Michel Sevier

Translator: R. S. Townsend

Release Date: April 9, 2016 [EBook #51708]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOLSTOI FOR THE YOUNG ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)











                         TOLSTOI FOR THE YOUNG

                     [Illustration: IVAN THE FOOL.

                           _Frontispiece._]




                            TOLSTOI FOR THE
                                 YOUNG

                       SELECT TALES FROM TOLSTOI

                      Translated from the Russian
                                  By
                          MRS. R. S. TOWNSEND

               WITH SIX COLOURED PLATES BY MICHEL SEVIER

                                LONDON
                KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LTD
                     NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO.

                                 1916




CONTENTS


                                          PAGE

IVAN THE FOOL                                1

WHERE THERE IS LOVE, THERE IS GOD ALSO      56

A PRISONER                                  82

EMELIAN AND THE EMPTY DRUM                 138

THE GREAT BEAR                             156

THREE QUESTIONS                            158

THE GODSON                                 167




LIST OF COLOURED PLATES


Ivan the Fool                                 _Frontispiece_

Where there is Love, there is God also      _To face p._ 57

A Prisoner                                               82

Emelian and the Empty Drum                              138

Three Questions                                         158

The Godson                                              167




IVAN THE FOOL

     THE STORY OF IVAN THE FOOL AND HIS TWO BROTHERS SIMON THE WARRIOR
     AND TARAS THE POT-BELLIED, AND OF HIS DEAF AND DUMB SISTER, AND THE
     OLD DEVIL AND THREE LITTLE DEVILKINS.


Once upon a time there lived a rich peasant, who had three sons--Simon
the Warrior, Taras the Pot-bellied, and Ivan the Fool, and a deaf and
dumb daughter, Malania, an old maid.

Simon the Warrior went off to the wars to serve the King; Taras the
Pot-bellied went to a merchant’s to trade in the town, and Ivan the Fool
and the old maid stayed at home to do the work of the house and the
farm. Simon the Warrior earned a high rank for himself and an estate and
married a nobleman’s daughter. He had a large income and a large estate,
but he could never make both ends meet, for, what he managed to gather
in, his wife managed to squander; thus it was that he never had any
money.

And Simon the Warrior went to his estate one day to collect his income,
and his steward said to him, “There is nothing to squeeze money out of;
we have neither cattle, nor implements, nor horses, nor cows, nor
ploughs, nor harrows; we must get all these things first, then there
will be an income.”

Then Simon the Warrior went to his father and said, “You are rich,
father; and have given me nothing, let me have a third of your
possessions and I will set up my estate.”

And the old man replied, “Why should I? You have brought nothing to the
home. It would be unfair to Ivan and the girl.”

And Simon said, “Ivan is a fool and Malania is deaf and dumb; they do
not need much, surely.”

“Ivan shall decide,” the old man said.

And Ivan said, “I don’t mind; let him take what he wants.”

Simon took a portion of his father’s goods and moved them to his
estate, and once more he set out to serve the King.

Taras the Pot-bellied made a great deal of money and married a
merchant’s widow, but still, it seemed to him that he had not enough, so
he too went to his father and said, “Give me my portion, father.” And
the old man was loath to give Taras his portion, and he said, “You have
brought us nothing; everything in the home has been earned by Ivan; it
would be unfair to him and the girl.”

And Taras said, “Ivan is a fool, what does he need? He cannot marry, for
no one would have him, and the girl is deaf and dumb and does not need
much either.” And turning to Ivan, he said, “Let me have half the corn,
Ivan. I will not take any implements, and as for the cattle, I only want
the grey cob; he is of no use to you for the plough.”

Ivan laughed.

“Very well,” he said, “you shall have what you want.”

And Taras was given his portion, and he carted the corn off to the town
and took away the grey cob, and Ivan was left with only the old mare to
work the farm and support his father and mother.


II

The old Devil was annoyed that the three brothers had not quarrelled
over the matter and had parted in peace. He summoned three little
Devilkins.

“There are three brothers,” he said, “Simon the Warrior, Taras the
Pot-bellied, and Ivan the Fool. I want them all to quarrel and they live
in peace and goodwill. It is the Fool’s fault. Go to these three
brothers, the three of you, and confound them so that they will scratch
out each others’ eyes. Do you think you can do it?”

“We can,” they said.

“How will you do it?”

“We will ruin them first,” they said, “so that they have nothing to eat,
then we will put them all together and they will begin to fight.”

“I see you know your work,” the old Devil said. “Go then, and do not
return to me until you have confounded the whole three, or else I will
skin you alive.”

And the Devilkins set out to a bog to confer on the matter, and they
argued and argued, for each wanted the easiest work, and they decided to
cast lots and each to take the brother that fell to him, and whichever
finished his work first was to help the others. And the Devilkins cast
lots and fixed a day when they should meet again in the bog, in order to
find out who had finished his work and who was in need of help.

The day arrived and the Devilkins gathered together in the bog. They
began to discuss their work. The first to give his account was the one
who had undertaken Simon the Warrior. “My work is progressing well,” he
said. “To-morrow Simon will return to his father.”

“How did you manage it?” the others asked him.

“First of all,” he said, “I gave Simon so much courage that he promised
the King to conquer the whole world. And the King made him the head of
his army and sent him to make war on the King of India. That same night
I damped the powder of Simon’s troops and I went to the King of India
and made him numberless soldiers out of straw. And when Simon saw
himself surrounded by the straw soldiers, a fear came upon him and he
ordered the guns to fire, but the guns and cannon would not go off. And
Simon’s troops were terrified and ran away like sheep, and the King of
India defeated them. Simon was disgraced. He was deprived of his rank
and estate and to-morrow he is to be executed. I have only one day left
in which to get him out of the dungeon and help him to escape home.
To-morrow I shall have finished with him, so I want you to tell me which
of you two is in need of help.”

Then the second Devilkin began to tell of his work with Taras. “I do not
want help,” he said; “my work is also going well. Taras will not live in
the town another week. The first thing I did was to make his belly grow
bigger and fill him with greed. He is now so greedy for other people’s
goods that whatever he sees he must buy. He has bought up everything he
could lay his eyes on, and spent all his money, and is still buying with
borrowed money. He has taken so much upon himself, and become so
entangled that he will never pull himself out. In a week he will have to
repay the borrowed money, and I will turn his wares into manure so that
he cannot repay, then he will go to his father.”

“And how is your work getting on?” they asked the third Devilkin about
Ivan.

“My work is going badly,” he said. “The first thing I did was to spit
into Ivan’s jug of kvas to give him a stomach-ache and then I went into
his fields and made the soil as hard as stones so that he could not move
it. I thought he would not plough it, but the fool came with his plough
and began to pull. His stomach-ache made him groan, yet still he went on
ploughing. I broke one plough for him and he went home and repaired
another, and again persisted in his work. I crawled beneath the ground
and clutched hold of his ploughshares, but I could not hold them--he
pressed upon the plough so hard, and the shares were sharp and cut my
hands. He has finished it all but one strip. You must come and help me,
mates, for singly we shall never get the better of him, and all our
labour will be wasted. If the fool keeps on tilling his land, the other
two brothers will never know what need means, for he will feed them.”

The first Devilkin offered to come and help to-morrow when he had
disposed of Simon the Warrior, and with that the three Devilkins parted.


III

Ivan had ploughed all the fallow but one strip, and he went to finish
that. His stomach ached, yet he had to plough. He undid the harness
ropes, turned over the plough and set out to the fields. He drove one
furrow, but coming back, the ploughshares caught on something that
seemed like a root.

“What a strange thing!” Ivan thought. “There were no roots here, yet
here’s a root!”

He put his hand into the furrow and clutched hold of something soft. He
pulled it out. It was a thing as black as a root and it moved. He looked
closely and saw that it was a live Devilkin.

“You horrid little wretch, you!”

Ivan raised his hand to dash its head against the plough, but the
Devilkin squealed, “Don’t kill me, and I’ll do whatever you want me to.”

“What can you do?”

“Tell me what you want.”

Ivan scratched his head.

“My stomach aches,” he said; “can you make it well?”

“I can.”

“Do it, then.”

The Devilkin bent down, rummaged about with his nails in the furrow and
pulled out three little roots, grown together.

“There,” he said; “if any one swallows a single one of these roots all
pain will pass away from him.”

Ivan took the three roots, separated them and swallowed one. His
stomach-ache instantly left him.

“Let me go now,” the Devilkin begged once more. “I will dive through the
earth and never bother you again.”

“Very well,” Ivan said; “go, in God’s name.”

At the mention of God the Devilkin plunged into the ground like a stone
thrown into water, and there was nothing but the hole left. Ivan thrust
the two remaining little roots into his cap and went on with his
ploughing. He finished the strip, turned over his plough and set off
home. He unharnessed and went into the house, and there was his brother,
Simon the Warrior, sitting at table with his wife, having supper. His
estate had been taken from him; he had escaped from prison and come back
to live with his father.

As soon as Simon the Warrior saw Ivan, he said to him, “I have come with
my wife to live with you; will you keep us both until I find another
place?”

“Very well,” Ivan said, “you can live here.”

When Ivan sat down by the table, the smell of him was displeasing to the
lady and she said to her husband, “I cannot sup together with a
stinking peasant.”

And Simon the Warrior said, “My lady says you do not smell sweet; you
had better eat in the passage.”

“Very well,” Ivan said. “It is time for bed anyway, and I must feed the
mare.”

Ivan took some bread and his coat and went out for the night.


IV

That night, having freed himself of Simon the Warrior, the first little
Devilkin set out to seek Ivan’s Devilkin, to help him plague the Fool as
they had agreed. He came to the fields, looked all round for his mate,
but he was nowhere to be seen; he only found a hole. “I see some
misfortune has happened to my mate; I must take his place. The ploughing
is all finished; I must upset the Fool at the mowing.”

And the Devilkin went to the meadow and flooded it and trampled the hay
in the mud.

Ivan awoke at daybreak, put his scythe in order and set out to the
meadow to mow the hay. Ivan swung the scythe once, he swung it twice,
but the scythe grew blunt and would not cut; he had to sharpen it. Ivan
struggled and struggled and struggled.

“This won’t do,” he said; “I must go home and bring a whetstone and a
hunk of bread. If it takes me a week I’ll not give up until I’ve mowed
it every bit.”

And the Devilkin grew pensive when he heard these words.

“The Fool has a temper,” he said; “I can’t catch him this way; I must
think of something else.”

Ivan returned, sharpened his scythe and began to mow. The Devilkin crept
into the grass, caught hold of the scythe by the heel and pushed the
point into the ground. It was hard for Ivan, but he mowed all the grass,
except a little piece in the swamp.

The Devilkin crept into the swamp, thinking, “Even if I have to cut my
hands I won’t let him mow that!”

Ivan came to the swamp. The grass was not thick, but the scythe could
not cut through it. Ivan grew angry and began to mow with all his might.
The Devilkin began to lose hold, seeing that he was in a bad plight,
but he had no time to get away and took refuge in a bush. Ivan swung the
scythe near the bush and cut off half the Devilkin’s tail. He finished
mowing the grass, told the old maid to rake it up and went away to mow
the rye.

He came to the field with his sickle, but the Devilkin with the clipped
tail was there before him. He had entangled the rye, so that the sickle
could not take it. Ivan went back for his reaping-hook and reaped the
whole field of rye. “Now,” he said, “I must tackle the oats.”

At these words the Devilkin with the clipped tail thought, “I did not
trip him up with the rye, but I’ll do so with the oats. If only the
morrow would come!”

In the morning the Devilkin hurried off to the field of oats, but the
oats were all harvested. Ivan had reaped them overnight so that less of
the grain should be wasted. The Devilkin lost his temper at that.

“He has mutilated and exhausted me, the fool! I’ve never had such
trouble on the battlefield even. The wretch doesn’t sleep and you can’t
get ahead of him. I’ll creep into the stacks of sheaves and rot the
grain.”

And the Devilkin crept into a stack of sheaves, and began to rot them.
He heated them, grew warm himself and fell asleep.

Ivan harnessed the mare and set out with his sister to gather in the
sheaves. He stopped by the stack and began to throw the sheaves into the
cart. He had thrown up two sheaves and was going to take up a third,
when the fork dug into the Devilkin’s back. He looked at the prongs and
saw a live Devilkin with his tail clipped, wriggling and writhing and
trying to get away.

“You horrid little wretch! You here again!”

“I’m not the same one,” the Devilkin pleaded. “The other was my brother.
I belong to your brother Simon.”

“Whoever you are you shall share the same fate.”

Ivan was about to dash it against the cart, when the Devilkin cried out,
“Spare me! I’ll not worry you again, and I’ll do whatever you want me
to.”

“What can you do?”

“I can make soldiers out of anything you choose.”

“What good are they?”

“You can make them do anything you like. Soldiers can do everything.”

“Can they play songs?”

“They can.”

“Very well; make some, then.”

And the Devilkin said, “Take a sheaf of rye and bump it upright on the
ground, saying,--

    My slave bids you be a sheaf no more.
    Every straw contained in you,
    Must turn into a soldier true.”

Ivan took the sheaf and banged it on the ground and repeated the
Devilkin’s words. And the sheaf burst asunder and every straw turned
into a soldier and at their head the drummer and bugler were playing.
Ivan laughed aloud.

“That was clever of you,” he said. “It will amuse Malania.”

“Let me go now,” the Devilkin begged.

“Not yet,” Ivan said. “I shall want to make the soldiers out of chaff so
as not to waste the grain. Show me first how to turn the soldiers into a
sheaf again, so that I can thrash it.”

And the Devilkin said, “Repeat the words--

    My slave bids every soldier be a straw
    And turn into a sheaf once more.”

Ivan repeated the Devilkin’s words, and the soldiers turned into a sheaf
again.

And again the Devilkin pleaded, “Let me go.”

“Very well,” Ivan said, taking him off the prongs. “Go, in God’s name.”

At the mention of God the Devilkin plunged into the ground like a stone
thrown into water, and there was nothing but the hole left.

When Ivan reached home, his other brother, Taras, and his wife were
sitting at table and having supper. Taras could not pay his debts; he
fled from his creditors and came home to his father. As soon as he saw
Ivan he said, “Until I can make some more money, will you keep me and my
wife?”

“Very well,” Ivan said. “You can live here.”

Ivan took off his coat and sat down to table.

And Taras’ wife said, “I cannot sup with a fool; he smells of sweat.”

Taras the Pot-bellied said, “You do not smell sweet, Ivan; go and eat in
the passage.”

“Very well,” Ivan said; “it’s time for bed, anyhow, and I must feed the
mare.”

He took his coat and a piece of bread, and went out.


V

That night, having disposed of Taras, the third little Devilkin came to
help his mates plague Ivan, as they had agreed. He came to the ploughed
field and looked and looked, but could see no one; he only found the
hole. Then he went to the meadow and found a piece of tail in the swamp,
and in the rye-stubble field he found another hole.

“I see some misfortune has happened to my mates. I must take their
places and tackle the Fool.”

The Devilkin set out to find Ivan.

Ivan had finished his work in the fields and had gone into the copse to
cut wood.

The brothers found it too crowded to live together in their father’s
house and they ordered Ivan to fell timber to build themselves new
houses.

The Devilkin rushed into the wood and crept into the knots of the trees
to prevent Ivan from felling them.

Ivan had cut a tree in the right way so that it should fall on to a
clear space, but the tree seemed to be possessed, and fell over where it
was not wanted, and got entangled among the branches. Ivan lopped them
off with his bill-hook and at last, with great difficulty, brought down
the tree. He began to fell another and the same thing was repeated. He
struggled and struggled and succeeded only after great exertion. He
began on a third and the same thing happened. Ivan had intended to fell
fifty trees at least, and he had not managed more than ten, and night
was coming on. Ivan was exhausted, and the steam rose from him and
floated through the wood like a mist; yet still he would not give up. He
felled another tree and his back began to ache so that he could not go
on. He stuck his axe into the trunk of a tree and sat down to rest.

When the Devilkin realized that Ivan had ceased to work, he rejoiced.
“He is worn out at last,” he thought; “now I can rest too.” And he sat
himself astride on a branch, exulting.

Ivan rose, took out his axe, flourished it aloft, and brought it down so
heavily that the tree came down with a crash. The Devilkin had no time
to disentangle his legs; the branch broke and pinned down his paw.

Ivan began to clear the tree and behold! there was a live Devilkin. Ivan
was amazed.

“You horrid little wretch! You here again!”

“I am not the same one,” the Devilkin said. “I belong to your brother
Taras.”

“Whoever you may be, you shall share the same fate.” And Ivan raised
the axe to bring it down on its head, but the Devilkin began to plead.

“Don’t kill me,” he said, “and I’ll do whatever you want me to.”

“What can you do?”

“I can make as much money as you like.”

“Very well,” Ivan said; “make it, then.”

And the Devilkin taught him what to do.

“Take some leaves from this oak and rub them in your hands and gold will
fall to the ground.”

Ivan took the leaves and rubbed them in his hand and gold rained down.

“This is well,” he said; “on holidays it will amuse the children.”

“Let me go,” the Devilkin begged.

“I don’t mind,” Ivan said, and taking up his axe, he freed the Devilkin
of the branch. “Go, in God’s name.”

At the mention of God the Devilkin plunged into the ground like a stone
thrown into water and there was nothing but the hole left.


VI

The brothers built themselves houses and began to live apart. Ivan
finished his work in the fields, brewed some beer and invited his
brothers to a feast. The brothers did not accept his invitation.

“We do not go to feast with peasants,” they said.

Ivan treated the peasants and the peasant-women and drank himself until
he got tipsy, and he went into the street and joined the dancers and
singers. He approached the women, and bade them sing his praises.

“I will give you something you have never seen in your lives,” he said.

The women laughed and began to sing his praises, and when they had
finished, they said, “Well, give us what you promised.”

“I will bring it in a moment,” Ivan said, and he took his seed-basket
and ran into the wood.

The women laughed. “What a fool!” they said, and forgot all about him,
when behold! Ivan returned, his basket full of something.

“Shall I share it out?”

“Do.”

Ivan took up a handful of gold and threw it to the women. Heavens! The
women rushed to pick it up, the peasants after them, snatching it out of
each others’ hands. One old woman was nearly killed in the fray.

Ivan laughed.

“You fools!” he said. “Why did you hurt Granny? If you are not so rough
I’ll give you some more.”

He scattered more gold. The whole village came up. Ivan emptied his
basket. The people asked for more, but he said, “Not now; another time
I’ll give you more. Now let us dance. You play some songs.”

The women began to play.

“I don’t like your songs,” Ivan said.

“Do you know any better ones?”

“You shall see in a moment.”

Ivan went into a barn, took up a sheaf, thrashed it, stood it up, and
banged it on the floor, and said--

    My slave bids you be a sheaf no more.
    Every straw contained in you
    Must turn into a soldier true.

And the sheaf burst asunder and turned into soldiers, and the drummers
and buglers played at their head. Ivan asked the soldiers to play some
songs, and led them into the street. The people were amazed.

When the soldiers had played their songs Ivan took them back into the
barn, forbidding any one to follow. He turned the soldiers into a sheaf
again and threw it on a pile of straw, then he went home and lay down to
sleep in the stables.


VII

Simon the Warrior heard of these things next morning, and went to his
brother.

“Tell me,” he said, “where did you get the soldiers from, and where did
you take them to?”

“What does it matter to you?”

“Matter, indeed! With soldiers one can do anything. One can conquer a
kingdom.”

Ivan wondered.

“Really! Then why didn’t you tell me before?” he said. “I will make you
as many soldiers as you like. It is well Malania and I have threshed so
much straw.”

Ivan took his brother to the barn and said, “Look here, if I make the
soldiers you must take them away at once, for if we have to feed them
they will eat up the whole village in a day.”

Simon the Warrior promised to take the soldiers away, and Ivan began to
make them. He banged a sheaf on the threshing-floor and a company
appeared. He banged another sheaf and a second company appeared. He made
so many soldiers that they filled the whole field.

“Are there enough now?” he asked.

Simon was overjoyed and said, “That will do, Ivan, thank you.”

“Very well. If you want more, come back and I’ll make them for you.
There is plenty of straw this year.”

Simon the Warrior soon put his troops in order, and went away to make
war.

He had no sooner gone than Taras the Pot-bellied came along. He, too,
had heard of yesterday’s affair and he said to his brother, “Tell me
where you get gold money from. If only I could get hold of some I could
make it bring in money from the whole world.”

Ivan wondered.

“Really? Then why didn’t you tell me before? I’ll make you as much as
you like.”

Taras was overjoyed.

“I shall be satisfied with three baskets full,” he said.

“Very well; come into the wood,” Ivan said; “but I had better harness
the mare, for you won’t be able to carry it away.”

They rode into the wood. Ivan began to rub the oak leaves, and made a
heap of gold.

“Is it enough?” he asked.

Taras was overjoyed.

“It will do for the present, thank you, Ivan,” he said.

“Very well,” Ivan said; “if you want more, come back and I’ll make it
for you. There are plenty of leaves left.”

Taras the Pot-bellied gathered up a whole cartload of money, and went
off to trade.

Both brothers had gone--Simon to make war and Taras to trade. And Simon
the Warrior conquered a kingdom, and Taras the Pot-bellied made much
money in trade.

When the two brothers met they told each other how they had come by
their soldiers and money.

Simon the Warrior said to his brother, “I have conquered a kingdom for
myself and live well, only I have not enough money to feed my soldiers.”

And Taras the Pot-bellied said, “I have made a heap of money, only
unfortunately I have no one to guard it.”

And Simon the Warrior said, “Let us go to our brother Ivan. I will ask
him to make more soldiers and give them to you to guard your money, and
you must ask him to make more money and give it to me to feed my
soldiers.”

And they came to Ivan.

And Simon said, “I haven’t enough soldiers, brother. Will you make
another couple of sheaves for me?”

Ivan shook his head.

“No,” he said; “I won’t make you any more soldiers.”

“But you promised you would.”

“I know I promised, but I won’t make any more.”

“Why not, you fool?”

“Because your soldiers killed a man. I will not let you have any more.”

And he was obstinate, and would not make any more soldiers.

Then Taras the Pot-bellied asked Ivan the Fool to make him more golden
money.

Ivan shook his head.

“No,” he said; “I won’t make any more money.”

“But you promised.”

“I know I promised, but I won’t make any more.”

“Why not, you fool?”

“Because your money took a cow away from a woman in the village.”

“But how can that be?”

“The woman had a cow. The children used to drink the milk, but the
other day they came to beg a little milk of me. ‘But where’s your cow?’
I asked them, and they said, ‘Taras’ bailiff came and gave mother three
golden coins and she gave him the cow; now we have no milk to drink.’ I
thought you only wanted to play with the golden coins, but you’ve taken
away the cow from the children; I won’t give you any more.”

And the Fool was obstinate and kept to his word.

And the brothers went away and deliberated over their difficult
situation in order to find a way out.

Simon said, “This is what we must do. You give me some of your money to
feed my soldiers, and I’ll give you half my kingdom and soldiers to
guard your money.”

Taras agreed. The brothers divided their possessions, and both became
kings and both were rich.


VIII

And Ivan lived at home, supporting his father and mother and working in
the fields with his deaf and dumb sister.

One day Ivan’s yard-dog fell sick. He grew mangy, and was near dying.
Ivan pitied it. He took a piece of bread from his sister, put it in his
cap, carried it out and threw it to the dog. The creases in his cap
parted and out rolled one of the little roots with the bread. The dog
ate it up. As soon as it had swallowed the root it began to jump about
and bark and play and wag its tail. It was quite well again.

The father and mother were amazed.

“How did you cure the dog?” they asked.

And Ivan said, “I had two little roots that could cure any pain, and the
dog swallowed one.”

It happened at the time that the King’s daughter fell ill, and the King
proclaimed to every town and village that he would reward any man who
could cure her, and that if he were an unmarried man he should have her
for his wife. The news came to Ivan’s village.

And the father and mother summoned Ivan and said to him, “Have you heard
of the King’s promise? You told us you had a little root that could cure
any sickness; go, cure the King’s daughter, you will then be happy for
life.”

“Very well,” Ivan said, “I will go.”

And Ivan prepared himself for the journey, and they dressed him in his
best clothes. When he came out on the doorstep he saw a beggar-woman
with a crippled hand.

“I heard that you can cure the sick,” she said. “Cure my hand, for I
cannot even put on my own shoes.”

“Very well,” Ivan said. And he took the little root out of his cap, gave
it to the beggar-woman and told her to swallow it. As soon as she
swallowed it, she recovered, and began to wave her hand.

The father and mother came out to bid good-bye to Ivan, and they heard
that he had given away his last root and had nothing left with which to
cure the King’s daughter, and they began to scold him.

“You pity a beggar-woman, yet have no pity for the King’s daughter,”
they reproached him.

But Ivan was sorry for the King’s daughter. He harnessed the mare, threw
some straw into the cart and got in.

“Where are you going to, you fool?”

“To cure the King’s daughter.”

“But you have nothing to cure her with now.”

“It doesn’t matter,” he said, and drove away.

He came to the King’s palace, and as soon as he stepped over the
threshold the King’s daughter got well.

The King was overjoyed. He ordered Ivan to be brought to him, and
dressed him in fine clothes.

“You must be my son-in-law,” he said.

“Very well,” Ivan said.

And Ivan married the princess. Her father died soon after, and Ivan
became King.

All three brothers were now kings.


IX

The three brothers lived and reigned.

The elder brother Simon the Warrior lived well. With his straw soldiers
he gathered together real soldiers. Throughout the whole of his kingdom
he ordered a levy of one soldier for every ten houses, and each soldier
had to be tall and whole of body and clean of face. In this way he
gathered many soldiers and trained them. If any one opposed him he sent
his soldiers off at once and imposed his will, and people began to fear
him. His life was a very goodly one. Whatever he saw and wanted was his.
He sent his soldiers and they brought him all he wanted.

Taras the Pot-bellied also lived well. He did not lose the money Ivan
had given him, but increased it a hundredfold. He introduced law and
order into his kingdom. He stowed his money away in coffers and levied
taxes on the people. There was a poll-tax, and tolls for walking and
driving, and a tax on shoes and stockings and frills. He got whatever he
wanted. For money people brought him everything, and even worked for
him, for every one wanted money.

Ivan the Fool, too, did not live badly. As soon as his father-in-law was
dead he took off his royal robes and gave them to his wife to stow away
in a chest. And he put on his coarse linen shirt and breeches and
peasant shoes and began to work once more.

“It’s so dull for me,” he said. “I’ve got fat, lost my appetite and
can’t sleep.”

He brought his father and mother and sister to live with him, and began
to work as of old.

“But you are a king,” people remonstrated.

“Even a king must eat,” he said.

One of his ministers came to him and said, “We have no money to pay
salaries.”

“Don’t pay them, then,” he said.

“But no one will serve us.”

“What does it matter? They needn’t. They’ll have more time for work.
There’s the manure to cart; heaps of it lying about.”

When people came to Ivan for justice and said, “That man stole my
money,” Ivan said, “Never mind; he must have wanted it.”

And all realized that Ivan was a fool. And his wife said to him, “People
say you are a fool.”

“What does it matter?” Ivan said.

His wife reflected awhile, but she was also a fool.

“Why should I go against my husband?” she said. “Where the needle goes,
the thread follows.”

So she took off her royal robes, put them away in a chest and went to
Malania to learn to work. When she knew how, she began to help her
husband.

All the wise left Ivan’s kingdom, and only the fools remained.

Nobody had money. They lived and worked, fed themselves and others.


X

The old Devil waited and waited for news of the Devilkins. He was
expecting to hear that they had ruined the three brothers, but no news
came. He set out himself to find them. He searched and searched, and
found nothing but three holes.

“They’ve not been able to manage it, evidently,” he thought. “I must
tackle the job myself.”

He went to look for the brothers, but they were no longer in their old
places. He found them in their different kingdoms. All three lived and
reigned. The old Devil was annoyed.

“Now we’ll see what I can do!” he said.

First of all he went to King Simon.

He did not go in his own shape, but disguised himself as a general. In
that guise he appeared before King Simon.

“I have heard that you are a great warrior, King Simon,” he said. “I am
well versed in these things and want to serve you.”

And King Simon began to ask him all manner of questions, and seeing that
he was a clever man, he took him into his service.

The new commander instructed King Simon how to collect a large army.

“First of all,” he said, “we must get more soldiers. There are many idle
people in your kingdom. We must conscript all the young men without
exception, then you will have an army five times as large as the one you
have now. Secondly, we must get new guns and cannons. I will get guns
that will fire a hundred bullets at one shot; they will rain out like
peas. And I will get cannons that will consume with fire either man or
horse or wall; they will burn everything.”

King Simon listened to the new commander, and enrolled all the young men
as soldiers and built new factories where he manufactured new guns and
cannons, then he made war on a neighbouring king. As soon as he was
faced by the opposing army, King Simon ordered his soldiers to rain
bullets against it and shoot fire from their cannons, in this way wiping
out half the hostile troops. The neighbouring king was alarmed; he
surrendered and gave up his kingdom. King Simon rejoiced.

“Now,” he said, “I will make war on the King of India.”

And the King of India heard of King Simon’s doings. He adopted all his
methods, and invented some improvements of his own. He not only enrolled
all the young men as soldiers, but the unmarried women as well, and in
consequence had a larger army than King Simon. And he made guns and
cannons like King Simon’s, and invented machines to fly in the air and
drop explosive bombs from above.

And King Simon set out to make war on the King of India, thinking he
would beat him as easily as he had beaten the other king, but the scythe
that had cut so well had lost its edge. The King of India did not give
Simon time to open fire, for he sent his women to fly in the air and
drop explosive bombs on Simon’s troops. And the women rained down bombs
from above like borax upon cockroaches and Simon’s troops scattered and
fled, and Simon was left alone.

The King of India took possession of Simon’s kingdom, and Simon the
Warrior escaped as best he could.

Having disposed of this brother, the old Devil went to King Taras.

He changed himself into a merchant and settled in Taras’ kingdom, where
he opened establishments and began to circulate money freely. He paid
high prices for everything, and the people flocked to him for the sake
of the extra profit. And the people came to have so much money that they
were able to settle all their arrears and to pay their taxes at the
proper time. King Taras rejoiced.

“Thanks to the merchant,” he thought, “I have more money than ever, and
I’ll be able to live better than I used to.”

And he began making all sorts of new plans, and decided to have a new
palace built for himself. He proclaimed to the people that he wanted
timber and stone and labour, for which he was prepared to pay a high
price. King Taras thought that for his money people would flock to work
for him as of old. But lo! all the timber and stone was taken to the
merchant, and all the labourers flocked to work for him. King Taras
raised his price, and the merchant raised his. King Taras had much
money, but the merchant had more and beat the King. The King’s palace
could not be built.

King Taras had arranged to make a new garden. When the autumn came he
proclaimed that he wanted men to come and plant his garden, but no one
came, for the people were all digging for the merchant.

Winter came. King Taras wanted to buy some sable skins for a new coat.
He sent a messenger to buy it, but the messenger returned empty-handed,
and said that there were no sable skins, for the merchant had bought
them all at a higher price, and made himself a sable carpet.

King Taras wanted to buy some stallions. He sent a messenger, but the
messenger returned and said that the merchant had all the good
stallions; they were carting water for him to make a pond.

And the King’s plans fell to pieces, for no one would work for him. All
worked for the merchant, and only brought him the merchant’s money to
pay the taxes.

And the King came to have so much money that he did not know where to
put it all, but he lived badly. The King gave up making plans; he would
have been contented to live quietly somehow, but even that was
difficult. He was hampered on all sides. His cook and coachman and
servants left him to go to the merchant’s. He even went short of food.
When he sent to the market to buy some provisions there were none left,
for the merchant had bought up everything, and the people only brought
the King money for their taxes.

King Taras lost patience and banished the merchant from his kingdom. The
merchant settled on the very border, and did exactly the same as before,
and for his money the people dragged everything away from the King and
brought it to the merchant. Life became very hard for the King. For
whole days he did not eat, and to make matters worse a rumour went
abroad that the merchant had boasted that he would buy the King
himself. King Taras lost courage, and did not know what to do.

Simon the Warrior came to him and said, “Will you support me? I have
been beaten by the King of India.”

King Taras himself was in a sad plight.

“I haven’t eaten anything myself for two days,” he said.


XI

Having disposed of the two brothers, the old Devil went to Ivan. He
changed himself into a general and came to Ivan, and began to persuade
him to set up a large army.

“A king should not live without an army,” he said. “Give me the power,
and I’ll collect soldiers from among your people and organize an army.”

Ivan listened to all he had to say.

“Very well,” he said, “organize one, then; only teach the soldiers to
sing nice songs, for I like singing.”

And the old Devil went through Ivan’s kingdom to collect a voluntary
army. To each recruit who should offer himself he promised a bottle of
vodka and a red cap.

The fools laughed at him.

“We have plenty of drink,” they said; “we brew it ourselves, and as for
caps, our women can make us any kind we like--embroidered ones and even
ones with fringes.”

And no one offered himself.

The old Devil went back to Ivan and said, “Your fools won’t enlist of
their own accord; we’ll have to force them.”

“Very well; force them, then.”

And the old Devil proclaimed throughout the kingdom that every man must
enlist as a soldier, and if he fails to do so Ivan will have him put to
death.

The fools came to the Devil and said, “You tell us that if we won’t
enlist as soldiers the King will have us put to death, but you don’t say
what will happen to us when we become soldiers. People say that soldiers
are killed.”

“You can’t get over that.”

When the fools heard this they kept to their decision.

“We won’t go,” they said. “We’d sooner die at home since we have to die
in either case.”

“What fools you are!” the old Devil said. “A soldier may or may not be
killed, but if you don’t go King Ivan will have you put to death for
certain.”

The fools reflected over this; then went to Ivan the Fool and said, “A
general has appeared among us who orders us all to enlist as soldiers.
‘If you go as a soldier,’ he says, ‘you may or you may not be killed,
but if you don’t go, King Ivan will have you put to death for certain.’
Is it true?”

Ivan laughed.

“How can I alone have you all put to death? Had I not been a fool I
would have explained it to you, but I don’t understand it myself.”

“Then we won’t go,” the fools said.

“Very well, don’t.”

The fools went to the general and refused to enlist as soldiers.

The old Devil saw that his plan would not work, so he went to the King
of Tarakan and wormed himself into his favour.

“Come,” he said, “let us go and make war on King Ivan. He has no money,
but grain and cattle and all manner of good things he has in abundance.”

The King of Tarakan prepared to make war. He gathered together a large
army, repaired his guns and cannons and marched across the border on his
way to Ivan’s kingdom.

People came to Ivan and said, “The King of Tarakan is marching on us
with his army.”

“Very well; let him,” Ivan said.

When the King of Tarakan crossed the border he sent his vanguard to find
Ivan’s troops. They searched and searched, but no troops were to be
found anywhere. Should they wait and see if they showed themselves? But
there was no sign of any troops and no one to fight with. The King of
Tarakan sent men to seize the villages. The soldiers came to one village
and the fools--men and women alike--rushed out and stood gaping at them
in wonder. The soldiers began to take away their corn and cattle and
the fools let them have what they wanted, making no resistance. The
soldiers went to another village and the same thing was repeated. And
they marched one day and another, and still the same thing happened.
Everything was given up without any resistance and the fools even
invited the soldiers to stay with them. “If you find it hard to live in
your parts, good fellows, come and settle with us altogether.” And the
soldiers marched from village to village and no troops were to be found
anywhere; the people lived, fed themselves and others; no one offered
any resistance and every one invited them to settle there.

And the soldiers grew weary of the job and they went back to their King
of Tarakan.

“We can’t fight here,” they said; “take us to another place. This is not
war; this is child’s-play. We can’t fight here.”

The King of Tarakan grew angry. He ordered his soldiers to go over the
whole kingdom and lay waste the villages and burn the corn and kill the
cattle.

“If you won’t do what I tell you,” he said, “I will punish you all.”

The soldiers were frightened and began to carry out the King’s commands.
They burnt the houses and corn and killed the cattle. The fools made no
resistance, they only wept. The old men wept and the old women and the
little children.

“Why do you treat us like this?” they said. “Why do you waste the good
things? If you want them, why not take them?”

And the soldiers grew to loathe their work. They refused to go further
and the troops dispersed.


XII

And the old Devil went away, having failed to bring Ivan to reason by
means of the soldiers.

The old Devil changed himself into a clean gentleman and came to live in
Ivan’s kingdom, hoping to ruin Ivan by money, as he had done Taras.

“I want to do you good and teach you common sense,” he said. “I will
build myself a house in your midst and open an establishment.”

“Very well,” the people said; “you can live here.”

The clean gentleman spent the night and in the morning he went out to
the square with a bag of gold and a bundle of papers and said, “You all
live like swine. I want to teach you how you ought to live. Build me a
house according to this plan. You will work for me and I will teach you
and pay you in golden money.” And he showed them the gold.

The fools marvelled. They had no money in circulation, but exchanged
thing for thing, or paid by labour. And they began to exchange things
with the gentleman and to work for his golden coins. And the old Devil,
as in Taras’ kingdom, began to circulate gold, and people brought him
things and worked for him.

The old Devil rejoiced.

“At last my plan is beginning to work!” he thought. “I will ruin him as
I ruined Taras, and will get him completely in my power.”

The fools collected the golden coins and gave them to the women to make
themselves necklaces and to the girls to plait into their hair; the
children even played with the coins in the street. After a while every
one had enough and refused to take more. And the clean gentleman’s house
was not half finished, and the corn and cattle had not yet been stored
up for the year. And the gentleman invited people to come and work for
him to bring him corn and rear his cattle, offering to pay many golden
coins for everything brought and every piece of work done.

But no one would come and work, and no one would bring him anything,
unless a chance boy or girl brought him an egg in exchange for a golden
coin; and no one else came and he was left without any food. And the
clean gentleman was hungry and went through the village to buy himself
something for dinner. He went into one house and offered a golden coin
for a chicken, but the mistress would not take it.

“I have many such coins,” she said.

He went into another place to buy a salt herring, offering a golden
piece. “I don’t want it, my good man,” the mistress said. “I have no
children to play with them, and have three of these pieces already as
curiosities.”

He went into a peasant’s for some bread. The peasant too would not take
the money.

“I don’t want it,” he said. “But if you want the bread in Christ’s name,
then wait, and I’ll tell my old woman to cut you some.”

The old Devil spat on the ground and fled from the peasant. To hear the
word Christ was worse than a knife to him, let alone to take anything in
His name.

And so he got no bread. All had gold; wherever the old Devil went no one
would give him anything for money, and every one said, “Bring us
something else instead, or come and work, or take it in Christ’s name.”
And the Devil had nothing to offer but money and had no liking for work,
and he could not take anything in Christ’s name. He lost his temper.

“What more do you want when I offer you money?” he said. “You can buy
anything you like for gold and employ any kind of labour.”

But the fools did not heed him.

“We don’t need money,” they said. “We exchange everything in kind and
have no taxes to pay; what good would it be to us?”

The old Devil went supperless to bed.

The story reached Ivan the Fool. People came to him and said, “What
shall we do? A clean gentleman has appeared in our midst who likes to
eat and drink well, and dress in fine clothes, but he won’t work and
won’t take anything in Christ’s name; he only offers us golden coins.
People gave him what he wanted until they had enough of these coins, and
now no one gives him anything. What are we to do with him? He may die of
hunger.”

Ivan listened to what they had to say.

“He must be fed, certainly. Let him act as a shepherd to you all in
turn.”

Since there was no way out, the old Devil had to go about shepherding.
He went from house to house until it came to Ivan’s turn. The old Devil
came in to dinner and the deaf and dumb girl was getting it ready. She
had often been deceived by lazy folk who came in early to dinner without
having done their share of work and ate up all the porridge, so she
invented a means of finding out the sluggards by their hands. Those who
had horny hands were put at the table; the others were given the
leavings. The old Devil sat down by the table, but the deaf and dumb
girl seized him by the hands and looked at them to see if they had any
blisters, but they were clean and smooth and the finger nails were long.
The girl grunted and pulled the old Devil away from the table.

Ivan’s wife said to him, “Don’t be offended, fine gentleman. My
sister-in-law never lets any one sit at the table who hasn’t horny
hands. In good time, when the others have finished, you shall get what
is left.”

And the old Devil was hurt that in the King’s house they should want to
feed him with the pigs. And he said to Ivan, “What a stupid custom there
is in your kingdom that all people must work with their hands! I
suppose you were too stupid to think of anything else. Do you think it’s
only with the hands people work? Do you know what wise men work with?”

And Ivan said, “How are we fools to know; we work only with our hands
and backs.”

“That is because you are fools. I will teach you how to work with the
head, then you will know that it is more profitable than to work with
the hands.”

Ivan wondered.

“Really! No wonder people call us fools!”

And the old Devil said, “Only it’s not easy to work with the head. You
won’t give me any dinner because my hands are smooth, but you don’t know
that it’s a hundred times harder to work with the head. Sometimes one’s
head nearly splits.”

Ivan grew thoughtful.

“Why should you torture yourself so, my good man? Wouldn’t it be better
to do the easier work with your hands and back?”

And the Devil said, “I torture myself because I pity you fools. If I
were not to torture myself you would remain fools for ever. I have
worked with the head and now I’m going to teach you.”

Ivan wondered.

“Teach us, then,” he said, “so that when our hands are tired we can work
with the head.”

The Devil promised to teach them.

And Ivan proclaimed throughout his kingdom that a clean gentleman had
appeared among them who would teach every one to work with his head and
that it was more profitable to work with the head than with the hands,
and he bade every man come and hear him.

There was a high tower in Ivan’s kingdom and a steep staircase leading
up to it and there was a turret on the top. And Ivan took the gentleman
up the tower, so that he might be seen by all.

And the gentleman took his place on the top of the tower and began to
speak, and the fools flocked to look at him. They thought that the
gentleman would really show them how to work with the head instead of
the hands, but he merely told them in words how they could live without
working at all. The fools did not understand him. They stared and
stared, then went home to attend to their own affairs.

The old Devil stood on top of the tower one day and another, speaking
all the time. He was hungry, but it never occurred to the fools to bring
him some bread up the tower. They thought that if he could work with the
head better than with the hands, he could easily make himself some
bread. The old Devil stood on the tower for another day, still speaking.
The people came and stared at him for a while; then went their ways.

“Well, has the gentleman begun to work with his head?” Ivan asked.

“Not yet; he is still jabbering.”

The Devil stood on the tower for another day and began to grow faint. He
swayed and knocked his head against a pillar. One of the fools saw him
and told Ivan’s wife, who hastened to Ivan at the ploughing.

“Come, come,” she said. “They say the gentleman has begun to work with
his head.”

Ivan wondered.

“Really?” he said, and turning his horse round, he went to the tower.
When he got there, the old Devil, who was quite faint with hunger by
this time, was staggering and knocking his head against the pillars, and
when Ivan came up he fell with a crash down the stairs, counting each
step on the way with a knock of his head.

“Well,” Ivan said, “the clean gentleman spoke truly when he said that
the head splits sometimes. Blisters on the hands are nothing to this;
after such work there will be bumps on the head.”

The old Devil fell to the bottom of the stairs and thumped his head
against the ground. Ivan was about to go up and see how much work he had
done, when suddenly the earth opened and the old Devil fell through.
Only a hole was left.

Ivan scratched his head.

“You horrid wretch! One of those devils again! The father of the others,
no doubt. What a huge one too!”

Ivan is living to this day and people flock to his kingdom. His own
brothers have come to him and he supports them. When any one comes and
says, “Feed me,” Ivan says, “Very well, you can live with us; we have
plenty of everything.” Only there is a special custom in his
kingdom--whoever has horny hands comes to table; whoever has smooth ones
eats the leavings.

[Illustration: WHERE THERE IS LOVE, THERE IS GOD ALSO.

_To face page 56._]




WHERE THERE IS LOVE, THERE IS GOD ALSO


In the town there was a shoemaker by the name of Martin, who lived in a
basement with a tiny little window looking out into the street. Martin
could see the people pass, and though he only got a glimpse of their
feet, he still knew every one, for Martin could recognize people by
their boots. Martin had lived in that basement for many a long year and
had numbers of acquaintances. There were not many pairs of boots in the
neighbourhood that had not been through his hands at least once or
twice--some for new soles, others for a patch or a stitch, or a second
time for new tops, perhaps. Martin had plenty of work, for he always did
it well; he gave good leather, did not overcharge, and kept true to his
word. If he could do a piece of work for the time it was required, he
took it; if not, he would not deceive his customers and told them so
beforehand. And all knew Martin and he had no lack of work.

Martin had always been a good man, but as he grew older he began to
think the more about his soul and to draw nearer to God. Martin’s wife
had died when he had still worked for a master, and he was left with a
boy of three years old. Their children never survived; the eldest were
all dead. At first Martin wanted to send his little son to a sister in
the country, but he felt sorry for the child, thinking, “It will be hard
for the poor boy to grow up in a strange family; I will keep him with
me.”

And Martin left his master and went into lodgings with his little son.
But God had not ordained Martin to be happy in his children. The boy had
no sooner grown up and become a help and a comfort to his father than he
fell sick, tossed about with fever for a week and died. Martin buried
his son and gave himself up to despair. His despair was so great that he
even began to complain against God. Martin was so lonely that many were
the times he prayed to God to let him die, reproaching Him for having
spared an old man like himself and taken his only beloved son. Martin
gave up going to church.

One day an old countryman came to visit him, who had been on a
pilgrimage for eight years. Martin opened his heart to the old man and
complained about his sorrow.

“I have no desire to live even,” he said; “I only want to die. That is
all I pray to God about. I am a desperate man now.”

And the old man said to him, “It is not well what you say, Martin; we
cannot judge the ways of God; they are beyond our understanding. He has
judged it fitting to take away your son and to let you live, so it must
be for the best. You despair because you want to live only for your own
personal pleasure.”

“And what else should I live for?” Martin asked.

And the old man said, “You must live for God, Martin. He gave you life
and you must live for Him. When you begin to live for Him and cease to
worry about anything, then all will become easy for you.”

Martin was silent a while; then asked, “How can one live for God?”

And the old man said, “We must live for God as Christ taught us. You can
read, can you not? Then buy the Gospels and read them and you will find
out how to live for God. The Gospels tell us everything.”

Martin took these words to heart. That very day he bought a copy of the
New Testament, printed in large type, and began to read it.

Martin had intended to read only on holidays, but when he once began he
grew so light-hearted that he read every day. Sometimes he got so
absorbed in his reading that the oil in the lamp burnt low and still he
could not tear himself away.

Martin read every evening, and the more he read the more clearly he
understood what God required of him and how he was to live for God. And
his heart grew lighter than ever. At one time when he went to bed he
would sigh and moan and think of his boy; now he only said to himself,
“Glory to Thee, glory to Thee, God! Thy will be done!”

And a change came into Martin’s life. On holidays he used to hang about
the public-houses to drink a cup of tea and did not refuse vodka even
when it came his way. He would drink, as it happened, with some
acquaintance, and though not exactly drunk, would come out of the
public-house in an excited mood and speak vain words, giving back rough
word for rough word.

But now this had all left him. His life became a peaceful and happy one.

In the morning he would sit down to his work and keep on for the
necessary time, then he would take the lamp off the wall, put it on the
table, fetch the Bible from a shelf, open it, and sit down to read. And
the more he read, the more he understood, and the serener and lighter
grew his heart.

One day Martin sat reading until late into the night. He was reading
Luke’s Gospel and had come to the sixth chapter and the verses, “And
unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek, offer also the other; and
him that taketh away thy cloke forbid not to take thy coat also. Give to
every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask
them not again. And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to
them likewise.”

And he also read the verses where our Lord says, “And why call ye me,
Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Whosoever cometh to me
and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I will show you to whom he is
like. He is like a man which built an house, and digged deep, and laid
the foundation on a rock; and when the flood arose, the stream beat
vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it; for it was founded
upon a rock. But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that
without a foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the
stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of
that house was great.”

When Martin read these words a feeling of joy entered his heart. He took
off his spectacles, laid them on the Bible, then resting his elbows on
the table, he began to ponder over what he had read. He compared his own
life to the light of these words. “Is my house built on a rock or on
sand?” he thought. “If on a rock it is well. It seems so easy when one
sits alone here, and one thinks one has done all that God commands, but
no sooner does one cease to be on one’s guard than one falls into sin. I
must persevere; it brings such happiness! Help me, oh God!”

With this thought in his mind, he was about to go to bed, but was loath
to leave his Bible, and went on reading the seventh chapter. He read
about the centurion, the widow’s son, and the answer to John’s
disciples, and he came to the passage where a rich Pharisee invited the
Lord to his house; and about the woman who was a sinner and anointed His
feet and washed them with her tears, and how the Lord comforted her. And
he came to the forty-fourth verse and began to read the words, “And he
turned to the woman and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I
entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet; but she
hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her
head. Thou gavest me no kiss, but this woman since the time I came in,
hath not ceased to kiss my feet; my head with oil thou didst not anoint,
but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment.”

Martin read these verses and thought, “He gave no water for His feet,
and no kiss, and he did not anoint His head with oil.” Once more Martin
took off his spectacles and laid them on the Bible.

“He must have been like me, that Pharisee. Like me he thought only of
himself--how to get a cup of tea, how to live in warmth and comfort. He
cared only for himself, with never a thought about his guest. And the
Lord Himself was his guest! I wonder if I would act like that if He came
to visit me?”

And Martin rested his elbows on the table and his head on his hands and
fell into a doze.

“Martin!” Some one suddenly breathed into his ear.

Martin started. “Who is that?” he asked, half asleep.

He turned and looked at the door, but no one was there. He called again
and this time he heard a voice say clearly, “Martin! Martin! Look out
for me in the street to-morrow; I am coming to see you.”

Martin roused himself, got up from the chair and began to rub his eyes.
He did not know whether he had heard the words in a dream or when awake.
He turned out the lamp and went to bed.

At daybreak next morning Martin arose, lit the stove, prepared some soup
and porridge, got the samovar ready, put on his apron and sat down at
the window to his work. As he worked he thought of what had happened
yesterday. Now it seemed to him that he had heard the voice in his
dreams, now that he had really heard it when awake.

“Things like that have happened before,” he thought.

Martin sat at the window and did not work so much as peer out into the
street, and when an unfamiliar pair of boots came along, he would stoop
down and look up to catch a glimpse of the person to whom they belonged.
A yard-porter passed in new felt boots and a water-carrier; then an old
soldier of Nicholas’ reign came alongside the window, spade in hand.
Martin recognized him by his felt boots. The old man was called Stepan
and a merchant who lived near by kept him out of charity. His duties
were to help the yard-porter. He stopped opposite Martin’s window to
clear away the snow. Martin looked at him and again went on with his
work.

“What a fool I am getting in my old age,” Martin thought, amused at his
own fancies. “Stepan is shovelling away the snow and I thought it was
Christ come to visit me. Old dotard that I am!”

Yet after a dozen stitches or so Martin was again drawn to the window.
He looked out and saw that Stepan had leaned his spade against the wall
and was resting and trying to warm himself. The man was old and broken
and had no strength even to clear away the snow. “Why not give him a
cup of tea while the samovar is still on the boil?” Martin thought. And
he put down his awl, rose, brought the samovar to the table, poured out
a cup of tea and tapped on the window. Stepan turned and came up. Martin
beckoned to him and went to open the door.

“Come in and get warm,” he said; “you must be quite frozen.”

“Christ save us! but my bones do ache,” Stepan said. Stepan came in,
shook the snow off himself and began to wipe his boots so as not to
dirty the floor, reeling as he did so.

“Don’t bother to wipe your feet,” Martin said; “I will wipe the floor
afterwards; I am used to that. Come in and sit down. Here is a cup of
tea.”

And Martin poured out two cups, gave one to his guest, poured some of
his own into a saucer and began to blow on it in order to cool it.

Stepan finished his cup, turned it upside down in the saucer, put the
remaining bit of sugar on top and began to thank Martin, who could see
that the old man wanted some more.

“Have another cup,” Martin said and poured out more tea for his guest
and for himself, and as he drank, he kept peering out of the window.

“Are you expecting some one?” Stepan asked.

“I? I hardly like to tell you whom I expect. But I wait and wait. A
certain word took possession of my heart. Was it a dream or not, I
cannot tell. It was like this, brother; I was reading the Gospels last
night about Christ our Father and how He suffered on earth. You have
heard tell of it, I daresay.”

“Yes,” Stepan said, “but we are ignorant folk and cannot read.”

“Well, I was reading how the Lord walked on earth, how He went to visit
a Pharisee who did not receive Him well. And I wondered, as I read, how
any man could receive the Lord without due honour. ‘Supposing such a
thing were to happen to me,’ I thought, ‘what would I not do to receive
Him? And the Pharisee did nothing!’ Thinking thus I fell asleep, and as
I slept I heard a voice call to me. I rose; the voice seemed to whisper
‘Expect me; I am coming to-morrow.’ I heard it twice. Well, would you
believe it? the idea took hold of my mind, and though I upbraid myself,
I keep on expecting the Lord to come to me.”

Stepan shook his head, but made no remark. He finished his cup of tea
and laid it down on its side in the saucer, but Martin took it up and
filled it again.

“Have some more, bless you! I was thinking, too, that our Lord despised
no one when He walked on earth; He was mostly with common folk. He went
about with plain people and chose His disciples from men of our
kind--simple workmen and sinners like ourselves. ‘He who raises
himself,’ He said, ‘shall be humbled, and he who humbles himself shall
be raised. You call Me Lord,’ he said, ‘and I will wash your feet. He
who would be first,’ He said, ‘let him be the servant of all, because,’
He said, ‘blessed are the poor, the humble, the meek, the merciful.’”

Stepan forgot his tea. He was an old man and easily moved to tears; and
as he listened the tears rolled down his cheeks.

“Have some more,” Martin said, but Stepan crossed himself, thanked
Martin, pushed away his cup and rose.

“Thank you Martin,” he said; “you have nourished my body and my soul.”

“You are welcome another time. I shall always be pleased to see you;
come again.”

Stepan went out; Martin poured himself out a last cup of tea, drank it,
cleared away the dishes and sat down again by the window to work,
stitching the back seam of a boot. As he stitched he peered out of the
window to see if Christ was coming, and he kept on thinking of Him and
His doings and recalling His words.

Two soldiers passed; one in Government boots, the other in boots of his
own; then the owner of the next house went by in clean goloshes, and a
baker with a basket. All these passed on; then a woman came up in
woollen stockings and coarse country shoes. She went by the window and
stopped by the wall. Martin looked up and saw that she was a stranger,
poorly clad, with a baby in her arms. She was standing with her back to
the wind, trying to wrap up the baby, but there was nothing to wrap it
in. Her garments were summer ones and ragged, too. Through the window
Martin heard the baby crying; the woman tried to comfort it but could
not.

Martin rose and going out at the door and up the steps, he called to
her.

“Come this way, my dear!”

The woman turned to him.

“Don’t stand in the cold there with the baby; come inside in the warm;
you can make him more comfortable here. Come along!”

The woman was surprised to see an old man in an apron and spectacles on
his nose inviting her to his room, but she followed him. They descended
the stairs and entered the room. Martin led her to the bed.

“Come and sit here, my dear,” he said. “It is nearer to the stove; you
can warm yourself and feed the baby.”

“I haven’t any milk; I have eaten nothing myself since morning,” the
woman said, yet putting the child to the breast.

Martin shook his head. He got some bread and a cup, opened the oven door
and filled the cup with soup. He then took the porridge-pot out of the
oven, but the porridge was not quite done. He spread a cloth and put the
soup and bread on the table.

“Sit down and have something to eat, my dear. I’ll look after the baby.
I have had children of my own and know how to nurse them.”

The woman crossed herself, sat down by the table and began to eat, and
Martin sat on the bed with the baby. He clucked and clucked, but having
no teeth he could not do it well, and the baby would not stop its
crying. And Martin tried to amuse him with his finger. He poked the
finger straight at the baby’s mouth, then drew it back again. He would
not let the child take the finger in its mouth because it was black with
cobbler’s wax. The child looked at the finger, stopped crying and began
to laugh. Martin was pleased.

As the woman ate she told him about herself, saying who she was and
where she was going.

“I am a soldier’s wife,” she said. “It is now eight months that my
husband has been taken away and I haven’t heard a word from him. I had a
place as a cook when the child was born, but they would not keep me
after that. I’ve been without a place for three months now and eaten
everything I possessed. I wanted to go as a wet-nurse, but no one would
have me because they said I was too thin. I went to a merchant’s wife
with whom our grandmother is in service and she promised to take me. I
thought she meant at once, but she told me to come next week, and she
lives a long way. I’m quite worn out, and the baby is half-starved. If
our landlady did not take pity on us, I don’t know how we should live.”

Martin sighed and said, “Have you no warm clothes?”

“How can I have warm clothes! I pawned my last shawl yesterday for
sixpence!”

The woman went up to the bed and took the child. Martin rummaged about
among the things hanging on the wall and brought out an old coat.

“Though it isn’t much of a thing, it will do to wrap up in,” he said.

The woman looked at the coat; then at the old man. She took the coat and
burst into tears. Martin turned away, crawled under the bed and pulled
out a box. He rummaged about in it and once more sat down facing the
woman.

And the woman said, “Christ save you, Grandfather. It must have been He
who sent me to your window, otherwise the child and I would have been
starved to death. It was mild when I started, but it’s very cold now.
The dear Lord made you look out of the window and caused you to pity
me.”

Martin smiled and said, “He did make me, indeed! I was not gazing idly
out of the window, my dear.”

And Martin told the woman his dream and how he had heard a voice and how
the voice had promised him that the Lord should come and visit him this
day.

“All things are possible,” the woman said, and she rose, put on the
coat, wrapped the child in it and began to take her leave, thanking
Martin.

“Take this in Christ’s name,” Martin said, thrusting a sixpence into her
hand. “It will do to take out your shawl.”

The woman crossed herself, Martin did likewise, then accompanied her to
the door.

When she had gone Martin ate some soup, cleared the table, and again sat
down to work. But he did not forget the window. As soon as a shadow fell
across it, he looked up to see who it was. Acquaintances passed and
strangers, and nothing particular happened. Suddenly Martin saw an old
apple-woman stop by his window. She was carrying a basket of apples. She
must have sold nearly all, for only a few remained. Over her shoulders
was a bag of chips and shavings, she had collected no doubt in
half-finished houses, and was taking home. The bag made her shoulder
ache it seemed and she wanted to change it over to the other shoulder.
She let it down on the pavement, placed her basket of apples on a post
and shook the bag. As she was doing so a boy in a ragged cap appeared
from somewhere, snatched an apple out of the basket and was about to
slip away when the old woman saw him and caught him by the sleeve. The
boy struggled to get away, but the old woman held him fast with both
hands. She had knocked off his cap and clutched him by the hair. The boy
screamed, the woman cursed. Martin did not wait to put the awl in its
place, but dropped it on the floor and rushed out at the door and
stumbled up the stairs, dropping his spectacles on the way. He ran out
into the street. The old woman was pulling the boy by the hair, cursing
and threatening to take him to the policeman; the boy struggled and
resisted her. “Why do you strike me?” he was saying. “I didn’t take
anything!”

Martin tried to part them; he took the boy by the hand and said, “Let
him go, Granny. Forgive him for Christ’s sake.”

“I’ll forgive him so that he won’t forget it for a long time! I’ll take
the rascal to the police-station!”

Martin began to plead with her.

“Let him go, Granny; he won’t do it again. Let him go for Christ’s
sake!”

The old woman released the boy, who was about to run away when Martin
stopped him.

“Ask Granny to forgive you and don’t do it again in future; I saw you
take the apple.”

The boy burst into tears and begged the old woman to forgive him.

“There now, here’s an apple for you,” and Martin took an apple from the
basket and gave it to the boy. “I’ll pay for it, Granny,” he said.

“You shouldn’t spoil the rascal,” the old woman said. “You ought to give
him something he wouldn’t forget in a week.”

“Ah, Granny, Granny!” Martin said; “that is how we judge, but God does
not judge like that. If the boy is to be whipped for an apple what do
you suppose we deserve for our sins?”

The old woman was silent.

And Martin told her the parable of the Lord who forgave his servant a
large debt and how the servant then seized his own debtor by the throat.
The old woman listened; the boy, too, stood and listened.

“God bade us forgive,” Martin said, “that we may be forgiven. Forgive
every one, even a thoughtless boy.”

The old woman shook her head with a sigh.

“It’s true enough,” she said, “but boys get very spoilt nowadays.”

“Then we old folk must teach them better,” Martin said.

“That’s just what I said,” the old woman replied. “I had seven of my
own, but now I’ve only a daughter left.” And the old woman began to tell
him where and how she lived with her daughter and how many grandchildren
she had. “You see,” she said, “I’m old now, yet still I work, for the
sake of the grandchildren. And nice children they are, too. No one is so
kind to me as they. The youngest won’t leave me for any one. It’s
nothing but Granny dear, Granny darling all the time.”

The old woman had quite softened by now.

“Children will be children,” she said to Martin in reference to the boy.
“The Lord bless them.”

She was about to raise her bag on to her shoulder when the boy rushed up
and said, “Let me carry it, Granny; I’m going your way.”

The old woman shook her head and put the bag on the boy’s shoulder. And
they walked down the street side by side. The old woman had forgotten to
ask Martin to pay for the apple. Martin stood and watched them,
listening to their voices as they talked together.

When they were out of sight he turned in, found his spectacles on the
stairs quite whole, took up his awl and sat down to his work once more.
After a while he could not see to pass the thread through the holes and
he noticed the lamplighter lighting the street lamps. “I must light up,”
he thought. And he trimmed the lamp, hung it up and went on with his
work. He finished the boot he was doing and turned it over to examine
it. He then put away his tools, cleared up the bits of leather and
thread and awls, took down the lamp, put it on the table and took the
Bible down from the shelf. He wanted to open it at the place he had
marked with a piece of morocco, but it opened at another place. And as
he opened the Gospels Martin recalled his dream of last night. And no
sooner had he thought of it than he seemed to hear some one move behind
him, as though some one were coming towards him. He turned, and it
seemed to him that people were standing in the dark corner, but he could
not make out who they were. And a voice whispered into his ear, “Martin,
Martin, don’t you know me?”

“Who is it?” Martin asked.

“It is I,” the voice said.

And Stepan stepped out of the dark corner, smiling, and vanished like a
cloud, and he was no more.

“It is I,” the voice said again, and from out the dark corner stepped
the woman with the baby, and she smiled and the child smiled, and they
too vanished.

“It is I,” said the voice once more, and out stepped the old woman and
boy with an apple in his hand, and both smiled and also vanished.

And a feeling of gladness entered Martin’s soul. He crossed himself, put
on his spectacles and began to read the Gospel just where it had opened.
At the top of the page were the words, “For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me meat; I was thirsty and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger and
ye took me in....”

And at the bottom of the page he read, “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto
one of the least of these brethren, ye have done it unto me.”

And Martin understood that his dream had come true and that his Saviour
had really come to him that day, and that he had welcomed Him.




A PRISONER


An officer by the name of Jilin served in the army in the Caucasus.

One day he received a letter from home. It was from his mother, who
wrote, “I am getting old now, and I want to see my beloved son before I
die. Come and say good-bye to me, and when you have buried me, with
God’s grace, you can return to the Army. I have found a nice girl for
you to marry; she is clever and pretty, and has some property of her
own. If you like her perhaps you will marry and settle down for good.”

Jilin pondered over the letter. It was true; his mother was really
failing fast, and it might be his only chance of seeing her alive. He
would go home, and if the girl was nice, he might even marry.

He went to his colonel and asked for leave, and bidding good-bye to his

[Illustration: A PRISONER.

_To face page_ 82.]

fellow-officers, gave his men four bucketfuls of vodka as a farewell
treat, and got ready to go.

There was a war in the Caucasus at the time. The roads were not safe by
day or by night. If a Russian ventured away from his fort, the Tartars
either killed him or took him off to the hills. So it had been arranged
that a body of soldiers should march from fortress to fortress to convoy
any person who wanted to travel. The soldiers marched in front and
behind; the travellers in between them.

It was summer. At daybreak the baggage-train was loaded behind the fort;
the convoy came out and started along the road. Jilin was on horseback;
his things were on a cart with the baggage-train.

They had about twenty miles to go. The baggage-train moved along slowly;
now the soldiers would stop, now a wheel came off a cart, now a horse
would refuse to go on, and then everybody had to wait.

It was already past noon and they had not covered half the distance. It
was hot, dusty, the sun scorching and no shade at all--bare steppe,
with not a tree or a bush the whole way.

Jilin rode on ahead and stopped to wait until the baggage-train should
catch him up. He heard the signal-horn sounded; the company had stopped
again. Jilin thought, “Why shouldn’t I go on alone without the soldiers?
I have a good horse, and if I come across any Tartars I can easily
gallop away. I wonder if it would be safe?”

As he stood there thinking it over, another officer, by the name of
Kostilin, rode up with a rifle and said, “Let us go on alone, Jilin. I’m
dreadfully hungry, and the heat’s unbearable. My shirt is wringing wet.”

Kostilin was a big man and stout; his face was burning red, and the
perspiration poured from his brow.

Jilin deliberated for a moment and said, “Is your rifle loaded?”

“It is.”

“Very well; come along. Only the condition is to be that we don’t
part.”

And they set off down the road alone. They were riding along the steppe
talking together and keeping a sharp look-out from side to side. They
could see a long way round them. When they left the steppe they came to
a road running down a valley between two hills. And Jilin said, “Let’s
go up on that hill and look about; some Tartars might easily spring out
from the hills and we shouldn’t see them.”

“What’s the use?” Kostilin said. “We’d better go on.”

Jilin paid no heed to him.

“You wait down here,” he said, “and I’ll just go up and have a look.”
And he turned his horse to the left up the hill. Jilin’s horse was a
hunter and carried him up the hill as though it had wings. He had bought
it for a hundred roubles as a colt, and broken it in himself. When he
reached the top of the hill he saw some thirty Tartars a few paces ahead
of him. He turned hastily, but the Tartars had seen him and gave chase
down the hill, getting their rifles out as they went. Jilin bounded
down as fast as the horse’s legs would carry him, crying out to
Kostilin, “Get your rifle ready!” And in thought he said to his horse,
“Get me out of this, my beauty; don’t stumble, or I’m lost. Once I reach
the rifle, they shan’t take me alive!”

But Kostilin, instead of waiting when he saw the Tartars, set off full
gallop in the direction of the fortress, lashing his horse now on one
side, now on the other, and the horse’s switching tail was all that
could be seen of him in the clouds of dust.

Jilin saw that it was all up with him. The rifle was gone; with a sword
alone he could do nothing. He turned his horse in the direction of the
convoy, hoping to escape, but six Tartars rushed ahead to cut him off.
His horse was a good one, but theirs were better, and they were trying
to cross his path. He wanted to turn in another direction, but his horse
could not pull up and dashed on straight towards the Tartars. A
red-bearded Tartar on a grey horse caught Jilin’s eyes. He was yelling
and showing his teeth and pointing his rifle at him.

“I know what devils you are!” Jilin thought. “If you take me alive,
you’ll put me in a pit and have me flogged. I’ll not be taken alive!”

Though Jilin was a little man, he was brave. He drew his sword and
dashed at the red-bearded Tartar, thinking, “I’ll either ride him down
or kill him with my sword.”

But he had no time to reach the Tartar; he was fired at from behind and
his horse was hit. It fell to the ground full weight, pinning Jilin’s
leg. He attempted to rise, but two evil-smelling Tartars were already
sitting on him, twisting his arms behind him. He struggled, flung the
Tartars off, but three others leapt from their horses and fell on him,
beating him on the head with the butt ends of their rifles. A mist rose
before his eyes and he staggered. The Tartars seized him, and taking
spare girths from their saddles twisted his hands behind him and tied
them with a Tartar knot and dragged him to the saddle. They knocked off
his cap, pulled off his boots, searched him all over, took his money and
watch and tore his clothes. Jilin looked round at his horse. The poor
creature lay on its side just as it had fallen, struggling with its legs
in the air and unable to get them to the ground. There was a hole in its
head from which the dark blood was oozing, laying the dust for a yard
around.

One of the Tartars approached it and took off the saddle. As it was
still struggling, he drew a dagger and cut its windpipe. A whistling
sound came from its throat; the horse gave a shudder and died.

The Tartars took off the saddle and strappings. The red-bearded Tartar
mounted his horse, the others lifted Jilin into the saddle behind him,
and, to prevent his falling off, they strapped him to the Tartar’s
girdle, and took him off to the hills.

Jilin sat behind the Tartar, rocking from side to side, his face
touching the evil-smelling Tartar’s back. All he could see was the
man’s broad back and sinewy neck, the closely-shaven bluish nape peeping
out from beneath his cap. Jilin had a wound in his head, from which the
blood poured and congealed over his eyes, but he could not shift his
position on the saddle, nor wipe off the blood. His arms were twisted so
far behind his back that his collar-bones ached. They rode over the
hills for some time, then they came to a river which they forded and got
out on to a road running down a valley. Jilin wanted to see where they
were going, but his eyes were matted with blood and he could not move.

It began to get dark; they forded another river and rode up a rocky
hill; there was a smell of smoke and a barking of dogs. They had reached
a Tartar village. The Tartars got off their horses; the Tartar children
gathered round Jilin, yelling and throwing stones at him. A Tartar drove
them away, took Jilin off the horse and called his servant. A man with
high cheek-bones came up, clad in nothing but a shirt, and that so torn
that his breast was bare. The Tartar gave him some order. The man
brought some shackles, two blocks of oak with iron rings attached, and a
clasp and lock was fixed to one of the rings.

They untied Jilin’s arms, put on the shackles, took him to a shed,
pushed him in and locked the door. Jilin fell on to a dung heap. He
groped about in the darkness to find a softer place and lay down.


II

Jilin did not sleep the whole of that night. The nights were short.
Through a chink he saw that it was getting light. He got up, made the
chink a little bigger and peeped out.

He saw a road at the foot of a hill, to the right of which was a Tartar
hut with two trees near it. A black dog lay on the threshold and a goat
and kids were moving about and swishing their tails. Then he saw a young
Tartar woman coming from the direction of the hill. She wore a coloured
blouse and trousers with a girdle round her waist, high boots on her
feet and a kerchief on her head, on which she was carrying a tin pitcher
of water. Her back moved gracefully as she walked; she was leading a
closely-shaven Tartar boy, who wore nothing but a shirt. The Tartar
woman went into the hut with the water; the red-bearded Tartar of
yesterday came out in a silken tunic, a silver-hilted knife stuck in his
girdle and slippers on bare feet. A high, black sheepskin cap was pushed
far back on his head. He stretched himself as he came out and stroked
his red beard. He gave some order to his servant and went away.

Then two boys rode past. They had been to water their horses and the
horses’ noses were still wet. Some more closely-shaven boys came out,
dressed only in shirts with no trousers. A whole group of them came up
to the shed, and taking up a piece of stick, they thrust it through the
chink. Jilin grunted at them and the boys ran off, yelling, their little
white knees gleaming as they went.

Jilin was thirsty; his throat was parched. “If only some one would
come,” he thought. Soon the door of the shed opened and the red-bearded
Tartar entered with another, shorter than he, and dark. He had bright
black eyes, a ruddy complexion and a short beard. He had a jolly face,
and was always laughing. This man was dressed better than the first, in
a blue silken tunic, trimmed with braid. The knife in his broad girdle
was of silver, the shoes on his feet were of red morocco, embroidered in
silver thread, and over these he wore a thicker pair of shoes. His cap
was high and of white sheepskin.

The red-bearded Tartar entered, muttering some angry words. He leant
against the doorpost, playing with his dagger and looking askance at
Jilin, like a wolf. The dark man, quick and lively and moving as if on
springs, came up to Jilin and squatted down in front of him, showing his
teeth. He clapped Jilin on the shoulder and began to jabber something in
his own language, blinking his eyes and clacking his tongue. “Good
Russ! Good Russ!” he said.

Jilin understood nothing. “I am thirsty; give me some water,” he said.

The dark man laughed. “Good Russ!” he kept on saying.

Jilin made signs with his lips and hands that he wanted some water. The
dark man laughed, and putting his head out at the door, he called to
some one “Dina!”

A little girl came up. She was about thirteen, slight and thin, her face
resembling the dark man’s. She was obviously his daughter. She, too, had
bright, black eyes and a rosy complexion. She was clad in a long blue
blouse with broad sleeves, and loose at the waist--the hem and front and
sleeves were embroidered in red. She wore trousers and slippers and
shoes with high heels over them; she had a necklace round her throat
made out of Russian coins. Her head was bare. Her black plait was tied
with a ribbon, the ends of which were trimmed with silver roubles.

Her father said something to her. She ran away and came back again with
a tin jug of water. She gave it to Jilin and also squatted down in front
of him, huddled up, so that her shoulders came lower than her knees. She
sat staring at Jilin as he drank, as at some strange animal.

Jilin handed her back the jug. She took it and bounded out like a wild
goat. Even her father could not help laughing. He sent her off somewhere
else. She ran away with the jug and brought back some unleavened bread
on a round wooden platter, and huddling down in front of him once more,
she again stared at him open-eyed.

The Tartars went out and locked the door.

After a while the red-bearded man’s servant came up and called to Jilin.
He too, did not know Russian, only Jilin understood that he wanted him
to go somewhere.

Jilin followed him limping, for the shackles impeded his walking. He
followed the servant. They came to a Tartar village, consisting of
about ten houses, a Tartar church with a dome on top in the midst of
them. In front of one house stood three saddled horses; some boys were
holding them by their bridles. The dark little Tartar rushed out of this
house and beckoned to Jilin to come to him. He laughed, jabbered
something in his own tongue and went in again. Jilin came to the house.
The room was large, the mud walls smoothly plastered. Near the front
wall lay a pile of brightly coloured feather beds, on the side walls
hung rich rugs with rifles and pistols and swords fastened to them, all
inlaid in silver. At one wall was a small stove on a level with the
earthen floor, which was beautifully clean. In the near corner a felt
carpet was spread on which were rich rugs and down cushions. On these
rugs, in slippers only, sat some Tartars--the dark one, the red-bearded
one and three guests. All had down cushions at their backs. In front of
them, on a wooden platter, were some millet pancakes, some melted butter
in a cup and a jug of Tartar beer. They took the pancakes up with their
fingers, and their hands were all greasy with the butter.

The dark Tartar jumped up and bade Jilin sit down, not on the rugs, but
on the bare floor. Then he sat down on his rug again, and treated his
guests to more pancakes and beer. The servant made Jilin sit down in the
place assigned to him, took off his overshoes, which he placed by the
door where the other shoes were standing, and sat down on the felt
carpet, nearer to his master. He watched the others eating, his mouth
watering. When the Tartars had finished, a woman came in dressed like
the girl in trousers and a kerchief on her head. She cleared away the
remains, and brought a basin and a narrow-necked jug of water. The
Tartars washed their hands, laid them together, fell on their knees and
said their prayers in their own tongue. When they had finished one of
the guests turned to Jilin and addressed him in Russian.

“You were captured by Kasi-Mohammed,” he said, indicating the
red-bearded Tartar, “but he has given you to Abdul-Murat.” And he
indicated the dark Tartar. “Abdul-Murat is now your master.”

Jilin was silent.

Abdul-Murat now began to speak, pointing at Jilin and laughing. “A
soldier Russ, a good Russ,” he said.

And the interpreter said, “He wants you to write home asking your people
to send a ransom for you. When the money comes, he will let you go.”

Jilin reflected and said, “How much does he want?”

The Tartars deliberated among themselves; the interpreter said, “Three
thousand roubles.”

“I can’t pay as much as that,” Jilin said.

Abdul leapt up and began to gesticulate violently. He was saying
something to Jilin, thinking that he would understand.

“How much will you give?” the interpreter asked.

After reflection Jilin said, “Five hundred roubles.”

At this the Tartars all began talking together. Abdul shouted at the
red-bearded Tartar, jabbering away till he foamed at the mouth. The
red-bearded Tartar merely frowned and clacked his tongue.

They grew silent and the interpreter said, “The master thinks a ransom
of five hundred roubles is not enough. He himself paid two hundred
roubles for you. Kasi-Mohammed was in his debt, and he took you in
payment. He wants three thousand roubles and refuses to let you go for
less. If you won’t pay the money you’ll be flung into a pit and
flogged.”

“The more you show you’re afraid of them, the worse it is,” Jilin
thought. He leapt to his feet and said, “Tell the dog that if he begins
to threaten me, he shan’t have a farthing! I won’t write home at all! I
was never afraid of you, and I’m not going to be now, you dogs!”

The interpreter conveyed his words, and again the Tartars began to speak
all at once.

They jabbered for a long time, then the dark one sprang up and came to
Jilin.

“Russ,” he said, “_djigit, djigit_ Russ!” (Djigit in their tongue means
brave.) He laughed and said a few words to the interpreter, who turned
to Jilin.

“Will you give a thousand roubles?”

Jilin stuck to his own.

“I won’t give more than five hundred, not if you kill me.”

The Tartars conferred together, and sent the servant off somewhere, and
when he was gone they stared now at Jilin, now at the door.

The servant returned, followed by a stout, bare-footed man, in torn
clothes. On his feet were also shackles. Jilin gave an exclamation of
surprise. It was Kostilin. He, too, had been captured then. The Tartars
sat them down side by side, and they began to tell each other of their
experiences, the Tartars looking on in silence. Jilin told Kostilin what
had happened to him, and Kostilin told Jilin that his horse had got
tired, his rifle missed fire, and that this same Abdul had caught him up
and captured him.

Abdul jumped up and began to speak, pointing at Kostilin. The
interpreter explained that they both belonged to the same master, and
that the one who would produce the money first would be the first to be
set free.

“See how quiet your comrade is,” he said to Jilin. “You get angry and he
has written home asking to have five thousand roubles sent him. He will
be well fed, and no one will do him any harm.”

And Jilin said, “My comrade can do what he likes. He may be rich, and I
am not. I won’t go back on my word. You can kill me if you like, but you
get no advantage by that; I won’t write for more than five hundred
roubles.”

The Tartars were silent. Suddenly Abdul sprang up, took out a pen, ink
and a scrap of paper from a little box, put them in Jilin’s hands and
slapping him on the shoulder, said, “Write.” He had agreed to the five
hundred roubles.

“One moment,” Jilin said to the interpreter; “tell him that he must feed
and clothe us well, and that he must put us together so that we don’t
feel so lonely, and he must remove our shackles.”

He looked at Abdul as he spoke and smiled. Abdul too smiled and said,
“You shall have the best of clothes--coats and boots fit to be married
in, and you shall be fed like princes, and you can be together in the
shed if you like, but I can’t take off the shackles because you might
escape. You shall have them removed at night.” He rushed up to Jilin and
slapped him on the shoulder. “Fine fellow! fine fellow!” he said.

Jilin wrote the letter, but did not address it correctly, so that it
should not reach home. “I will escape, somehow,” he thought.

Jilin and Kostilin were taken back to the shed. They were given some
straw, a jug of water and bread, two old coats and some worn boots,
evidently taken from the bodies of dead soldiers. At night their
shackles were removed and they were locked in the shed.


III

Thus Jilin and his comrade lived for a month. Their master was always
cheerful. “You, good fellow, Ivan! I, Abdul, good fellow, too!” But he
fed them badly. All the food they got was some unleavened bread of
millet flour, or millet cakes, and sometimes nothing but raw dough.

Kostilin sent another letter home and did nothing but mope and wait for
the money to arrive. He would sit in the barn day after day, either
counting the days for the letter to come or sleeping. Jilin knew that
his letter would not reach home, but he never wrote another.

“Where on earth could mother get so much money from?” he thought. “She
lived mostly on what I used to send her, and if she has to procure five
hundred roubles she’ll be quite ruined. With God’s help I’ll get away
myself.”

So he kept his eyes open, planning how to run away.

He would walk about the village whistling, or doing something with his
hands, such as modelling dolls out of clay, or plaiting baskets out of
twigs. Jilin was very clever with his hands.

One day he modelled a doll with a nose, arms and legs and in a Tartar
shirt, and he put this doll on the roof of the shed. The Tartar girls
went to fetch water. The master’s daughter Dina caught sight of the
doll, and called to the others. They put down their pitchers and looked
up laughing. Jilin took down the doll and held it out to them. They
laughed, but dared not take it. He left the doll and went into the shed
to see what would happen.

Dina ran up, looked about her, snatched up the doll and ran off with it.

The following morning, at daybreak, Dina came out on the threshold with
the doll. She had bedecked it in bits of red stuff, and was rocking it
to and fro like a baby and singing a lullaby. An old woman came out and
began to scold her. She snatched the doll away from the child and broke
it, and sent Dina off to her work.

Jilin made another doll--a better one this time--and gave it to Dina.

One day Dina brought Jilin a jug, and sitting down, she looked up at
him, laughing and pointing to the jug.

“What is she so pleased about?” Jilin thought. He took up the jug to
have a drink, thinking it was full of water, but it turned out to be
milk. “How nice!” he said, and finished it. Dina was overjoyed.

“Nice, nice, Ivan!” She jumped up and clapped her hands in glee, then
she seized the jug and ran away.

After that she brought Jilin milk in secret every day. When the Tartar
women used to make cheese cakes out of goat’s milk, which they baked on
the roof, she would steal some and bring them to him. Once the master
killed a sheep, and Dina brought Jilin a piece of the flesh hidden in
her sleeve. She would throw the things down and run away.

One day there was a terrible storm; the rain poured down in torrents for
a whole hour. The rivers became turbid. At the ford, the water rose till
it was seven feet high and the current was so strong that it moved the
stones along. Rivulets flowed everywhere and there was a roar in the
hills. After the storm streams flowed down the village everywhere.
Jilin asked his master for a knife, and with it he shaped a small
cylinder and made a wheel out of a piece of board, to which he fixed two
dolls, one on each side. The little girls brought him some bits of stuff
with which he dressed the dolls--one as a peasant, the other as a
peasant woman. He made them fast and set the wheel so that the stream
should work it. When the wheel began to whirl the dolls danced.

The whole village gathered round--boys and girls and women and men came
to look on, the latter clacking their tongues.

“Ah, Russ! Ah, Ivan!” they said.

Abdul had a Russian watch which was broken. He called Jilin and showed
it to him. Jilin said, “Give it to me and I’ll mend it.”

He took it to pieces with the knife, sorted the pieces out, put them
together again and the watch went quite well.

The master was pleased and presented him with one of his old tunics, all
in holes. Jilin had to take it, besides, it would come in useful to
cover up with at night.

From that day Jilin’s fame as a man skilled in handiworks spread fast.
People began to flock to him from distant villages, one bringing the
lock of a rifle or a pistol that wanted mending; another a watch or a
clock. The master gave him some tools--pincers, gimlets and a file.

One day a Tartar fell ill, and they came to Jilin, saying, “Come and
heal him.” Jilin did not know how to heal the sick, but he went just the
same thinking, “The man will recover of his own accord.” He disappeared
into the shed and mixed up some sand and water. In the presence of the
Tartars he mumbled some words over the mixture, and gave it to the sick
man to drink. Fortunately the Tartar got well.

Jilin began to understand a little of their tongue. Some of the Tartars
got quite used to him, and when they wanted him would call “Ivan, Ivan!”
Others again looked at him askance as at some wild beast.

The red-bearded Tartar did not like Jilin. He frowned when he saw him,
and either turned away or cursed. There was another old man, who did
not live in the village, but somewhere at the foot of a hill. He came to
the village only sometimes. Jilin saw him when the man went to the
Mosque to say his prayers. He was short and had a white towel wound
round his cap. His beard and moustaches were clipped and white as down;
his face was wrinkled and brick-red. He had a hooked nose like a hawk’s,
and cruel grey eyes. He had no teeth, but two tusks in front. He would
pass with his turban on his head, leaning on his staff, and peering
round like a wolf. When he saw Jilin he snorted and turned away.

One day Jilin went to the hills to find out where the old man lived. He
strolled down a path and saw a little garden and a stone wall; within
the stone wall were wild cherry trees and peaches and a hut with a flat
roof. He came a little closer and saw some hives made of plaited straw
and humming bees flying hither and thither. The old man was on his
knees, doing something to the hives. Jilin stood on tiptoe in order to
get a better view; his shackles rattled. The old man turned and gave a
yell and pulling a pistol out of his belt he aimed at Jilin, who just
managed to shield himself behind the stone wall.

The old man came to the master to complain. The master summoned Jilin
and laughing, asked him, “Why did you go to the old man’s place?”

“I didn’t mean to do him any harm,” he said. “I only wanted to see how
he lived.”

The master conveyed his words to the old man.

But the old man was angry. He jabbered away, showing his tusks, and
shook his fists menacingly at Jilin.

Jilin could not understand all he said, but he gathered that the old man
was warning the master not to keep any Russians about the place, but to
have them all killed.

The old man went away.

Jilin asked the master who the old man was, and the master said, “He is
a great man! He was the bravest of us all, and killed many Russians,
and he was rich, too. He had three wives and eight sons, who all lived
in the same village. The Russians came, destroyed the village, and
killed seven of his sons. One son only remained, and he surrendered to
the Russians. The old man followed them, and also gave himself up. He
lived with the Russians for three months, when he found his son. With
his own hand he killed him and escaped. After that he gave up fighting.
He went to Mecca to pray to God; that is why he wears a turban. Any man
who has been to Mecca is called a _Hadji_ and has to wear a turban. He
does not like you Russians. He wanted me to kill you, but I can’t kill
you because I paid money for you. Besides, I have taken a fancy to you,
Ivan; I would not let you go at all, if I had not given my word.” He
laughed and added in Russian, “You are a good fellow, Ivan, and I,
Abdul, am a good fellow too.”


IV

Jilin lived in this way for a month. During the day he wandered about
the village or busied himself with some handicraft, and at night he dug
in his shed. The digging was difficult because of the stones, but he
worked away at them with his file and at last made a hole beneath the
wall big enough to crawl through. “If only I knew the neighbourhood well
and which way to turn,” he thought; “the Tartars would not tell me.”

He chose a day when the master was away, left the village after dinner
and went up a hill, hoping to find out the lie of the land from there.
But before the master departed he told one of his boys to look after
Jilin and not let him out of his sight. The boy ran after Jilin, crying,
“Don’t go away! My father told you not to! I’ll call for help!”

Jilin tried to soothe him.

“I’m not going far,” he said. “I only want to go to the top of that hill
to find a certain herb with which to cure your people when they are
sick. Come with me; I can’t run away with the shackles on my feet. I’ll
make you a bow and some arrows to-morrow.”

After some persuasion the boy went with him. The hill did not seem very
far off, but it was difficult to get there shackled as he was. He
struggled and struggled until he got to the top. Jilin sat down and
began to look about him. To the south, beyond the shed, a herd of horses
could be seen in a valley, and at the bottom of the valley was another
village. Beyond the village was a steep hill and another hill beyond
that. Between the two hills was a dark patch that looked like a wood;
hill upon hill rose beyond it, and higher than all rose the snow-capped
mountains as white as sugar, the peak of one standing out above the
rest. To the east and west were other such hills; here and there were
villages in the valleys from which the smoke curled up. “This is all
Tartar country,” he thought. He looked in the direction of Russia--below
was a river, and the village he lived in, surrounded by gardens. On the
river bank, looking as tiny as dolls, sat Tartar women, washing clothes.
Beyond the village was a hill, lower than the one to the south and
beyond that two wooded hills. Between these two hills was a plain and
away in the distance on this plain smoke seemed to rise. Jilin tried to
recollect where the sun rose and set when he lived in the fort. He came
to the conclusion that the fortress must lie in that very valley.
Between these two hills would he have to make his way when he escaped.

The sun began to set. The snow-clad mountains turned from white to red;
the dark mountains grew darker still; a vapour rose from the valley, and
the plain where he supposed the fortress to be seemed on fire with the
sunset’s glow. Jilin gazed intently; something seemed to quiver in that
plain, like smoke rising from a chimney, and Jilin felt sure that the
Russian fortress was there.

It was getting late. The Mullah’s cry was heard. The flocks and herds
were driven home; the cows were lowing. The boy kept on begging “Come
home,” but Jilin had no desire to move.

They returned home. “Now that I know the place I must lose no time in
running away,” Jilin thought. He wanted to escape that very night, for
the nights were dark then; the moon had waned, but as luck would have
it, the Tartars returned that evening. Sometimes when they brought
cattle home they would come back in a jolly mood, but this time there
were no cattle, and on the saddle of his horse they brought back the
red-bearded Tartar’s brother who had been killed. They returned in a
gloomy mood and gathered the village together for the burial. Jilin,
too, came out to look on. They wrapped the body in a sheet and without a
coffin carried it out and laid it on the grass beneath some plane-trees.
The Mullah arrived and the old men; they wrapped towels around their
caps, took off their shoes, and squatted down on their heels before the
body. In front was the Mullah, behind him three old men in turbans, and
behind them three other Tartars. They sat silent, eyes downcast, for a
long time, then the Mullah raised his head and said, “Allah!” (meaning
God). After this word he again bowed his head, and there was another
long silence. They all sat motionless. Again the Mullah raised his head
and said “Allah!” All repeated “Allah!” and again there was silence. The
dead man lay on the grass motionless and the others, too, seemed dead.
Not a single man moved. The only sound to be heard was the rustling of
the leaves on the plane-trees. After a while the Mullah said a prayer;
all rose, and raising the dead man with their hands they carried him
away. They brought him to a pit. It was not an ordinary pit, but
hollowed out under the ground like a vault. They lifted the dead man
under the arms, bent him into a sitting posture and let him down into
the pit, gently, his hands folded in front of him.

The master’s servant brought some green rushes which they stuffed into
the pit, then they hastily covered it with earth, levelled the ground
properly and placed a stone, upright, at the head of the grave. They
stamped down the soil and once more sat down round the grave side by
side. For a long time they were silent.

“Allah! Allah!” they sighed and rose.

The red-bearded Tartar gave some money to the old men, then he took a
whip, struck himself three times on the forehead and went home.

In the morning Jilin saw the red-bearded Tartar leading a mare out of
the village, followed by three other Tartars. When they left the village
behind them the red-bearded Tartar took off his coat, rolled up his
sleeves--his arms were strong and muscular--and taking out a dagger, he
sharpened it on a whetstone. The other Tartars raised the mare’s head
and he cut her throat. The mare dropped down and he began to skin her
with his big hands. Women and girls came up and washed the entrails. The
mare was cut up and the pieces carried to the red Tartar’s hut, where
the whole village gathered for a funeral feast.

For three days they ate the mare’s flesh and drank beer in honour of the
dead man. All the Tartars were at home. On the fourth day, about dinner
time, Jilin saw that they were preparing to go away somewhere. The
horses were brought out, they got ready, and about ten of the Tartars,
the red one among them, went away, Abdul remaining at home. There was a
new moon and the nights were still dark.

“To-night we must escape,” Jilin thought, and he unfolded his plan to
Kostilin. But Kostilin was afraid.

“How can we run away? We don’t know the way even.”

“I know the way.”

“We couldn’t get there in one night.”

“If we can’t, we can hide in the wood. I’ve got some cakes here for us
to eat. What’s the good of sitting here? If they send your ransom, well
and good, but supposing they can’t raise the money? The Tartars are
getting vicious because our people have killed one of their men. They
will probably kill us.”

Kostilin reflected.

“Very well; let us go,” he said.


V

Jilin went down the hole and made it a little bigger so that Kostilin
could crawl through, then they sat down to wait till all grew quiet in
the village.

When the Tartars had all retired to rest Jilin crawled under the wall
and got outside. “Follow me,” he whispered to Kostilin.

Kostilin crept into the hole, but his foot hit against a stone and made
a clatter. The master had a speckled watch-dog--a vicious creature it
was, called Ulashin. The dog growled and rushed forward, followed by
other dogs. Jilin gave a low whistle and threw it a cake. Ulashin
recognized him, wagged his tail and ceased his growling.

The master heard the dog and called from the hut, “_Hait, hait_,
Ulashin!”

But Jilin stroked the dog by the ears and it did not move. It rubbed
itself against Jilin’s legs and wagged its tail.

They sat crouching round the corner. All grew quiet; only a sheep was
heard to cough in a barn, and below, the water rippled over the stones.
It was dark; the stars were high in the sky and the new moon looked red
as it set behind the hill, horns upwards. A mist as white as milk lay
over the valley.

Jilin got up and turning to Kostilin said, “Let us come, brother.”

They set off, but they had no sooner done so than the Mullah intoned
from the roof “Allah Besmilla! Ilrachman!” That meant that the people
would be going to the Mosque. They sat down again, crouching behind the
wall. For a long time they sat there waiting till the people went past.
All grew quiet again.

“Now then; with God’s help we must get away,” Jilin said.

They crossed themselves and started. They went through the yard and
downhill to the river which they forded and came out into the valley.
The mist hung low and dense; above, the stars were visible. By the stars
Jilin could tell the direction they had to take. It was cool in the mist
and walking was easy, only their boots were uncomfortable, being old and
worn out. Jilin cast his off and went bare-foot. He leapt over the
stones, gazing up at the stars. Kostilin began to lag behind.

“Slower, please,” he said, “these cursed boots hurt my feet.”

“Take them off and you’ll find it easier.”

Kostilin too went barefoot, but that was still worse. The stones cut his
feet and he lagged behind more than ever.

Jilin said to him, “The cuts on your feet will heal up soon enough, but
if the Tartars catch us it will be much more serious; they will kill
us.”

Kostilin did not say anything, but walked along, groaning.

They walked along the valley for a long time, when suddenly they heard
the barking of dogs. Jilin stopped and looked about him. He climbed up
the hill on all fours.

“We mistook our way, and turned to the right. Another Tartar village
lies here; I saw it from the hill the other day. We must turn back and
go to the left up the hill. There must be a wood here.”

And Kostilin said, “Let us rest a while; my feet are all bleeding.”

“They’ll get better in good time, brother. Walk more lightly--like
this.”

And Jilin turned back and went up the hill to the left into the wood.
Kostilin kept on lagging behind and groaning. Jilin remonstrated with
him and walked on ahead.

They reached the top of the hill, where they found a wood, as Jilin had
surmised. They went into it. The brambles tore the last of their
clothes. At last they found a path and followed it.

“Stop!” Jilin said. There was a trampling of hoofs on the path. They
listened. It sounded like the trampling of horses’ hoofs, but the sound
ceased. They moved on and again they heard the trampling. They stopped
again, and the sound ceased. Jilin crept nearer and in a patch of light
on the path he saw something standing. It seemed like a horse, yet not
like a horse, and it had something queer on its back that was not a man.
The creature snorted. “What a strange thing!” Jilin thought, and gave a
low whistle. The animal bounded off the path into the thicket and there
was a sound of cracking branches as though a storm had swept through the
wood.

Kostilin fell to the ground in terror; Jilin laughed, saying, “It’s a
stag. Can’t you hear how it’s breaking the branches with its antlers? We
are afraid of him and he is afraid of us.”

They went on further. The Great Bear was already setting and the dawn
was not far off. They did not know whether they were going in the right
direction. It seemed to Jilin that the Tartars had brought him along
this path when they captured him and that it was still another seven
miles to the fortress, but he had nothing certain to go by, and at night
one could easily mistake the way.

Kostilin dropped to the ground and said, “Do what you like, but I can’t
go any further. My legs won’t carry me.”

Jilin attempted persuasion.

“It’s no good,” Kostilin said; “I can’t go on.”

Jilin grew angry and vented his disgust.

“Then I’m going alone--good-bye.”

Kostilin jumped up and followed.

They walked another three miles. The mist grew denser; they could not
see ahead of them and the stars were no longer visible.

They suddenly heard a trampling of horses coming from the direction in
which they were going. They could hear the horse’s hoofs hit against the
stones. Jilin lay flat down and put his ear to the ground to listen.

“There is certainly a horseman coming towards us,” he said. They ran off
the path into the thicket and sat down to wait. After a while Jilin
crept out into the path to look. A mounted Tartar was coming along,
driving a cow and humming softly to himself. When he had passed Jilin
turned to Kostilin, “Thank God the danger is over. Come, let us go.”

Kostilin attempted to rise, but dropped down again.

“I can’t, I can’t! I’ve no more strength left.”

The man was heavy and stout and had perspired freely. The heavy mist had
chilled him, tired and bleeding as he was, and made him quite stiff.
Jilin tried to lift him, but Kostilin cried out, “Oh, it hurts!”

Jilin turned to stone.

“Why did you shout? The Tartar is still near; he will have heard you,”
he remonstrated, while to himself he thought, “The man is evidently
exhausted; what shall I do with him? I can’t desert him.” “Come,” he
said, “climb on to my back, then, and I’ll carry you if you really can’t
walk.”

He helped Kostilin up, put his arms under his thighs and carried him on
to the path.

“For heaven’s sake don’t put your arms round my neck or you’ll throttle
me. Hold on to my shoulders.”

It was hard work for Jilin; his feet, too, were bleeding and tired. He
bent down now and then to get him in a more comfortable position, or
jerked him up so that he sat higher up, and went on his weary way.

The Tartar had evidently heard Kostilin’s cry. Jilin heard some one
following behind, calling out in the Tartar tongue. Jilin rushed into
the thicket. The Tartar seized his gun and aimed; the shot missed; the
Tartar yelled and galloped down the path.

“I’m afraid we’re lost,” Jilin said. “He’ll collect the Tartars to hunt
us down. If we don’t cover a couple of miles before they’ve time to set
out, nothing will save us.” To himself he thought, “Why the devil did I
saddle myself with this block? I should have got there long ago had I
been alone.”

Kostilin said, “Why should you be caught because of me?”

“I can’t go alone; it would be mean to desert a comrade.”

Again he raised Kostilin on to his shoulders and went on. They walked
along for another half-mile. They were still in the wood and could not
see the end of it. The mist had dispersed; the clouds seemed to gather;
the stars were no longer visible. Jilin was worn out. They came to a
spring walled in by stones. He stopped and put Kostilin down.

“Let us rest a minute or two and have a drink and a bite of this cake.
We can’t be very far off now.”

He had no sooner lain down to take a drink from the spring than he heard
the stamping of horses behind him. Again they rushed into the thicket to
the right and lay down on a slope.

They heard a sound of Tartar voices. The Tartars stopped at the very
spot where they had turned off the path. They seemed to confer for a bit
and then set a dog on the scent. There was a crackling among the bushes
and a strange dog appeared. It stopped and began to bark. The Tartars
followed it. They were also strangers. They bound Jilin and Kostilin and
took them off on their horses.

When they had ridden for about two miles they were met by the master,
Abdul, and two other Tartars. He exchanged some words with the strange
Tartars, after which Jilin and Kostilin were removed to his horses and
he took them back to the village.

Abdul was no longer laughing, and did not say a word to them.

They reached the village at daybreak and were placed in the street. The
children gathered round them and threw stones at them and lashed them
with whips, yelling all the time.

All the Tartars collected in a circle, the old man from the hills among
them. They began to talk; Jilin gathered that they were considering what
was to be done with him and Kostilin. Some said that they should be sent
into the hills, and the old man persisted that they should be killed.
Abdul would not agree to either plan, saying, “I paid money for them and
must get their ransom.”

The old man said, “They will not pay the ransom; they’ll only do a great
deal of harm. It is a sin to keep Russians. Kill them and have done with
it.”

The Tartars dispersed. The master came to Jilin and said to him, “If
your ransom does not come in two weeks, I’ll have you flogged, and if
you attempt to run away again, I’ll kill you like a dog. Write home, and
write to the point!”

They brought them pen and paper and they wrote home. The shackles were
put on them and they were taken behind the Mosque, where there was a
pit of about twelve feet deep, into which they were flung.


VI

Life was very hard for them now. Their shackles were never removed, and
they were never allowed out into the fresh air. Raw dough was thrown
down to them, as one throws a scrap to a dog, and water was let down in
a jug. The stench in the pit was awful and it was damp as well. Kostilin
grew quite ill; he swelled very much and every bone in his body ached.
He either groaned or slept all the time. Jilin, too, was depressed; he
saw that their position was hopeless and did not know how to get out of
it.

He tried to make a tunnel but there was nowhere to throw the earth, and
when the master saw it, he threatened to kill him.

One day when he was most downcast, squatting in the pit and thinking of
his freedom, a cake fell from above, then another, and some cherries
rained down. Jilin looked up and saw Dina. She looked at him, laughed
and ran away.

“I wonder if Dina would help us?” Jilin thought.

He cleared a space in the pit, dug a little clay and began to make some
dolls. He moulded some men and horses and dogs, thinking, “When Dina
comes, I will throw these up to her.”

But Dina did not come the next day. Jilin heard a stamping of horses;
some Tartars seemed to have come and all gathered at the Mosque,
shouting and arguing. It was something about the Russians. The voice of
the old man was heard, too. Jilin could not understand all they said,
but he made out that the Russians were near, that the Tartars were
afraid of them and did not know what to do with their prisoners.

After a while they dispersed. Suddenly Jilin heard a rustling overhead
and saw Dina crouching at the edge of the pit, her knees higher than her
head. She bent over so that the coins at the end of her plaits dangled
over the pit. Her eyes were twinkling like two stars. From her sleeve
she took two cakes made of cheese and threw them down to him. Jilin
picked them up and said, “What a long time it is since you’ve been to
see me! I’ve made you some toys. Look, here they are!” He threw them up
to her one by one. She shook her head and averted her gaze. “I don’t
want them, Ivan,” she said. “They want to kill you, Ivan,” she added,
pointing to her throat.

“Who wants to kill me?”

“My father. The old man told him to, but I’m sorry for you.”

Jilin said, “If you are sorry for me, bring me a long pole.”

She shook her head, as much as to say that it was impossible.

He put up his hands and implored her, “Please, Dina! Be a dear and bring
it!”

“I can’t,” she said; “they’ll catch me at home.” Then she went away.

In the evening Jilin sat in the pit wondering what would happen. He kept
looking up; the stars were visible, but the moon had not yet risen. The
Mullah’s call was heard, and all grew quiet. Jilin began to doze,
thinking “The child is afraid.” Suddenly some clay dropped on to his
head. He looked up, and saw a long pole poking into the opposite wall of
the pit; it began to slide down. Jilin took hold of it and lowered it
with a feeling of gladness at his heart. It was a stout, strong pole; he
had noticed it many times on the roof of the master’s hut.

He looked up. The stars were shining high in the sky and above the pit
Dina’s eyes gleamed in the darkness like a cat’s. She leant her head
over the pit and whispered, “Ivan, Ivan!” making signs to him to speak
low.

“What is it?” Jilin asked.

“They’ve all gone but two.”

“Come, Kostilin,” Jilin said; “let us try our luck for the last time;
I’ll help you up.”

But Kostilin would not listen to him.

“No,” he said; “it seems that I can’t get away from here. How can I come
when I’ve hardly strength enough to move?”

“Well, good-bye, then. Don’t think ill of me.”

He kissed Kostilin, and seizing the pole, he asked Dina to hold it at
the top and swarmed up. Twice he fell back again; the shackles hindered
him. But Jilin persevered and got to the top somehow. Dina clutched hold
of his shirt and pulled at him with all her might, unable to control her
laughter.

When he clambered out Jilin handed her the pole, saying, “Put it back in
its place, Dina, for if they notice its absence they’ll beat you.”

Dina dragged the pole away, and Jilin went down the hill. When he got to
the bottom he sat down under its shelter, took a sharp stone and tried
to wrench the lock off the shackles. But the lock was a strong one and
would not give way, and it was difficult to get at it. Suddenly he heard
some one coming downhill, skipping lightly. “It must be Dina again,” he
thought.

She came up, took the stone and said, “Let me try.”

She knelt down and tried to wrench the lock off, but her little hands
were as slender as little twigs and there was no strength in them. She
threw the stone down and burst into tears. Jilin made another attempt,
while Dina squatted down beside him and put her hand on his shoulder.

Jilin looked round; to the left the sky was all red; the moon was
beginning to rise. “I must cross the valley and be under shelter of the
wood before the moon rises,” he thought. He got up and threw away the
stone. “I must go as I am in the shackles. Good-bye, Dina, dear; I shall
always remember you.”

Dina seized hold of him and groped about his coat with her hand to find
a place to thrust some cakes into. Jilin took the cakes.

“Thank you, little one,” he said. “There won’t be any one to make you
dolls when I am gone.” He stroked her head.

Dina burst into tears and, covering her face with her hands, she fled up
the hill, bounding along like a wild goat. The coins in her plait could
be heard jingling in the darkness.

Jilin crossed himself, took the lock of his shackles in his hand to
prevent a clatter and started on his way, dragging his shackled leg and
gazing at the red in the sky where the moon was rising. This time he
knew the way. He had to go straight on for six miles. If only he could
reach the wood before the moon had quite risen! He forded the river. The
red light over the hill had paled. He walked along the valley, looking
back now and then; the moon was not yet visible. The light grew brighter
and brighter; one side of the valley was quite light. The shadows crept
along the foot of the hill, drawing nearer to him.

Jilin kept in the shadow. He hurried, but the moon moved faster than he;
the hilltops on the right were already lit up. As he neared the wood,
the moon rose over the hills, all white, and it grew as light as day.
All the leaves on the trees could be seen distinctly. It was still and
light on the hills; there was a dead silence, except for the murmur of
the river below.

He reached the wood without meeting any one. He chose a dark spot and
sat down to rest.

When he had rested a while and eaten a cake, he found a stone and once
more tried to wrench the lock of the shackles. He cut his hands, but
could not manage it. He rose and went on his way. After a mile he was
quite worn out and his feet ached terribly. At every dozen steps or so
he stopped. “It can’t be helped,” he thought. “I must drag myself on so
long as my strength holds out, for if I once sit down I shan’t be able
to get up again. I can’t reach the fortress to-night, that is obvious;
as soon as it gets light I’ll hide in the wood and go on again when it
gets dark.”

He walked the whole night, meeting only two Tartars, but Jilin heard
them from a distance and took refuge behind a tree.

The moon began to pale; the dew fell; it was near dawn, but Jilin had
not yet reached the end of the wood. “I’ll walk another thirty steps or
so then I’ll creep into the thicket and sit down,” he thought. He
covered the thirty steps and saw that he had come to the edge of the
wood. When he came out it was quite light. Before him stretched the
steppe and to the left, near the foot of a hill, he saw a dying fire
from which the smoke rose and men were sitting about it.

He looked intently; there was a flash of guns--they were soldiers,
Cossacks!

Jilin was overjoyed. He summoned his remaining strength and began to
descend the hill, thinking, “God forbid that any mounted Tartar should
see me now in the open field; though near my own people, I could not
escape.”

The thought had no sooner crossed his mind than he saw three Tartars
standing on a hill, not more than a few yards away. They had seen him
and dashed down towards him. His heart gave a great bound. He waved his
arms and shouted with all his might, “Help, help, brothers!”

The soldiers heard him; a few Cossacks sprang upon their horses and
dashed forward to cut across the Tartars’ path.

The Cossacks were far off and the Tartars were near, but Jilin made one
last effort; lifting the shackles with his hand, he ran towards the
Cossacks. He hardly knew what he was doing and crossed himself wildly,
crying, “Help, brothers, help!”

The Cossacks numbered about fifteen.

The Tartars grew afraid and stopped in hesitation before they reached
him. Jilin managed to get to the Cossacks. They surrounded him, asking
who he was and where he came from, but Jilin was quite beside himself
and could only repeat, through his tears, “Brothers, brothers!”

The soldiers came up and crowded round him, one giving him bread,
another porridge, another some vodka to drink, another gave him his
cloak to cover him, and another wrenched off the shackles.

The officers recognized him and took him to the fortress. His men were
delighted to see him; his fellow-officers gathered about him.

Jilin told them all that had happened to him and ended by saying,
“That’s how I went home and got married. I wasn’t meant to marry,
evidently.”

And Jilin remained in the army in the Caucasus. It was not until a month
later that Kostilin was released, after paying a ransom of five thousand
roubles. He was brought back in a half-dead condition.




EMELIAN AND THE EMPTY DRUM


Emelian was a labourer and worked for a master. He was walking through a
field one day on his way to work, when a frog hopped in front of him and
he just missed crushing it by stepping across. Suddenly some one called
to him from behind. He turned, and there stood a beautiful maiden, who
said to him, “Why don’t you marry, Emelian?”

“How can I, dear maiden? I possess nothing but the clothes I stand up
in, and who would have a husband like that?”

“Marry me,” the maiden said.

Emelian looked at her in admiration.

“I would with pleasure,” he said, “but how should we live?”

“What a thing to trouble about,

[Illustration: EMELIAN AND THE EMPTY DRUM.]

indeed!” the maiden said. “One has only to work the more and sleep the
less and one can always be clothed and fed.”

“Very well; let us marry, then,” Emelian said. “Where shall we live?”

“In the town.”

Emelian and the maiden went to the town. She took him to a little house
on the very edge and they married and set up housekeeping.

One day the King went for a drive beyond the town, and when passing
Emelian’s gate, Emelian’s wife came out to look at him. When the King
saw her he marvelled.

“What a beauty!” he thought. He stopped the carriage and called her to
him.

“Who are you?” he asked.

“Emelian the peasant’s wife.”

“How came a beauty like you to marry a peasant?” he asked. “You should
have been a queen.”

“Thank you for your kind words,” she said; “a peasant husband is good
enough for me.”

The King talked to her a while and went on his way. When he returned to
the palace Emelian’s wife did not go out of his head for a moment. The
whole night he could not sleep and kept on thinking how he could take
her away from Emelian, but no possible way occurred to him. He summoned
his servants and asked them to think of a way.

And the servants said to him, “Get Emelian to come and be a labourer in
the palace. We will wear him out with work, then his wife will become a
widow and you can have her.”

The King followed their advice. He sent a messenger to tell Emelian that
he was to come and be a yard-porter in the palace and bring his wife to
live with him there.

The messenger came to Emelian and repeated the King’s words. And
Emelian’s wife said to her husband, “It can’t be helped; you must go.
You can work there in the day and return to me at night.”

Emelian went away. When he came to the palace the King’s steward said to
him, “Why have you come without your wife?”

“Why should I drag her about with me? She has a home of her own.”

In the King’s yard Emelian was given enough work for two men. Emelian
set about it, not expecting to get it all finished, but behold! before
evening came it was all done. The steward, seeing that he had got
through the work, gave him four times as much for the morrow.

Emelian went home. The house was scrubbed and cleaned, the fire lighted,
the bread baked, the supper cooked. His wife was sitting at the table
sewing, waiting for him. She flew to the door to meet him, then laid the
supper and fed him well; afterwards she began to ask him about his work.

“It’s rather bad,” he said; “they set me tasks beyond my strength; they
wear me out with too much work.”

“Don’t you think about the work,” she said, “don’t look back to see how
much you have done, nor look ahead to see how much there is left. Just
keep straight on and all will be done in time.”

Emelian went to bed. In the morning he again set out to the palace. He
began his work and did not look round once, and behold! by evening it
was all finished; he went home when it was still light.

Again they increased Emelian’s work, but Emelian finished it all in time
and went home for the night as usual. A week passed. The King’s servants
saw that they could not get the better of Emelian by giving him rough
work so they gave him difficult work instead, but even that did not
help. No matter what they set him to do--carpentering, stone-cutting,
thatching--he got everything done in time and went home for the night to
his wife. Another week passed.

The King summoned his servants and said, “Is it for nothing that I keep
you? Two weeks have passed and still I do not see the fruits of your
work. You promised to wear Emelian out with work and each night from my
window I see him going home singing to himself. Are you making sport of
me, eh?”

The King’s servants began to excuse themselves. “We are doing the best
we can. We thought at first to wear him out with rough work, but you
can’t get him anyhow. We set him all kinds of tasks, such as sweeping,
but he doesn’t know what it means to be tired. Then we gave him
difficult work, thinking that he wouldn’t have brains enough to do it,
yet still, we couldn’t get the better of him. No matter what the work,
he tackles it and gets it all done in time. He must either be
extraordinarily strong or his wife must be a witch. We are sick of him
ourselves. We want to set him such a task that he cannot possibly do. We
thought of asking him to build a temple in a single day. You must send
for him and command him to build a temple opposite the palace in a
single day, and if he fails to do it, we can cut off his head for
disobedience.”

The King sent for Emelian.

“Build me a new temple in the square opposite the palace; by to-morrow
evening it must all be finished. If you do it, I will reward you; if
not, I will cut off your head.”

Emelian listened to the King’s words; then turned and went his way home.
When he got there he said to his wife, “Make yourself ready, wife; we
must run away or else we are both lost.”

“Why,” she said, “have you grown so faint-hearted that you want to run
away?”

“How can I help it when the King commanded me to build a temple
to-morrow before nightfall? If I fail to do it, he will have my head cut
off. There is only one way out. We must run away while there is yet
time.”

The wife did not approve of his words.

“The King has many soldiers; we shall not be able to escape them. And
while you have strength enough you must obey the King’s command.”

“But how can I obey if it’s beyond my strength?”

“My dear, don’t get excited. Have your supper and go to bed; get up
early in the morning and you’ll manage in good time.”

Emelian went to bed. His wife woke him in the morning.

“Go,” she said; “make haste and finish the temple. Here are nails and a
hammer. There is still a day’s work for you left to do.”

Emelian set out. When he came to the square, there in the middle stood a
new temple not quite finished. Emelian set to work to finish it and by
the evening it was all done.

The King awoke and looking out of the palace window he saw a new temple
in the square. Emelian was busy around, knocking a nail in here and
there. The King was not pleased with the temple; he was annoyed that he
had no pretext for cutting off Emelian’s head and taking his wife for
himself.

Again the King summoned his servants.

“Emelian has done this task too,” he said, “and I have no reason for
cutting off his head. This was not difficult enough; we must give him
something more difficult still. You decide what it shall be, or else
I’ll have your heads cut off first.”

And the servants bethought them to set Emelian to make a river that was
to wind round the palace and have ships sailing on it.

The King summoned Emelian and set him the new task.

“If you could make a temple in a single night,” he said, “you can do
this too. See that it is all finished by to-morrow, or else I shall cut
off your head.”

Emelian’s spirits fell lower than ever and he went home to his wife in a
sad mood.

“Why so sad?” asked his wife. “Has the King set you a new task?”

Emelian told her what it was.

“We must run away,” he concluded.

And the wife said, “We cannot escape the soldiers. You must obey.”

“But how can I?”

“My dear, don’t worry. Have your supper and go to bed. Get up early in
the morning and all will be ready in time.”

Emelian went to bed. In the morning his wife woke him.

“Go to the palace,” she said; “everything is finished. Only by the
harbour, opposite the palace, there is a little mound that wants
levelling; take the spade and level it.”

Emelian set out. He came to the town and there around the palace a river
flowed with ships sailing on it. Emelian went up to the harbour opposite
the palace and he saw an uneven place and began to level it.

The King awoke and looking out of his palace window he saw a river where
there was not one before and ships were sailing on it and Emelian was
levelling a little mound with his spade. And the King was alarmed. He
took no pleasure in the river or the ships, he was only annoyed that he
could not cut off Emelian’s head. “There is no task he cannot do,” he
thought. “What shall we do now?”

And the King summoned his servants and conferred with them.

“Think of a task,” he said, “that will be beyond Emelian’s strength, for
so far he has done everything we have thought of and I cannot take away
his wife.”

And the courtiers thought for a long time, then came to the King and
said, “You must summon Emelian and say to him, ‘Go to--I don’t know
where, and bring me--I don’t know what.’ He won’t be able to escape you
then, for wherever he goes you can say it was not the right place and
whatever he brings was not the right thing. Then you can cut off his
head and take away his wife.”

The King was pleased with the idea. He sent for Emelian and said to him,
“Go to--I don’t know where, and bring me--I don’t know what. And if you
don’t, I’ll cut off your head.”

Emelian went back to his wife and told her what the King had said. The
wife reflected.

“Well,” she said. “Be it on the King’s own head what his courtiers have
taught him. We must act with cunning now.”

She sat and thought it over for a while; then said to her husband, “You
must go a long way to our old grandmother, a peasant soldier’s mother,
and ask her to help you. She will give you something which you must take
straight to the palace and I will be there already. I cannot escape them
now; they will take me by force, but only for a short while. If you do
what grandmother tells you, you will soon set me free.”

And the wife prepared Emelian for the journey and gave him a bundle and
a spindle.

“Give grandmother this spindle,” she said; “by this she will know that
you are my husband.”

And the wife showed him the way. Emelian left the town and saw some
soldiers drilling. He stopped and watched them. The soldiers finished
their drill and sat down to rest. Emelian approached them and asked,
“Can you tell me, mates, how to get to--I don’t know where and bring
back--I don’t know what.”

The soldiers were perplexed at his words.

“Who sent you?” they asked.

“The King,” he said.

“We too,” they said, “since the day we became soldiers want to go to--we
don’t know where and find--we don’t know what, but we’ve never been able
to find it and so cannot help you.”

Emelian sat with the soldiers awhile then went on his way. He wandered
and wandered till he came to a wood. In the wood was a cottage and in
the cottage sat an old woman, a peasant soldier’s mother, spinning at
her wheel, and she wept as she spun and moistened her fingers with the
tears that flowed from her eyes.

“Who are you?” she cried in anger when she saw Emelian.

Emelian gave her the spindle and said that his wife had sent him. The
old woman instantly softened and began to ask him questions. And Emelian
told her his whole story of how he had married the maiden and gone to
live in the town, and how he had been taken to the King’s as a
yard-porter, and of the work he had done in the palace, and the temple
he had built in a night, and the river and ships he had made, and that
now the King had sent him to--I don’t know where to bring back--I don’t
know what.

The old woman listened to what he had to say and ceased her weeping. She
began to mutter to herself, “The time has come, I see. Very well,” she
said aloud; “sit down, my son, and have something to eat.”

Emelian had something to eat and the old woman said to him, “Here is a
ball of thread; roll it before you and follow wherever it leads. You
will have to go a long way, to the very sea. When you come to the sea
you will see a large town. Ask to be allowed to stay the night in the
outermost house and look for what you want there.”

“But by what signs shall I know it, grandmother?”

“When you see that which men listen to more than to father or mother,
that will be the thing you want. Seize it and take it to the King. He
will tell you you haven’t brought the right thing, and you must say to
him, ‘If it is not the right thing then I must break it.’ Then strike
this thing; carry it out to the river; break it and throw it into the
water. Then you will get back your wife and dry up my tears.”

Emelian took leave of the grandmother and went where the ball of thread
took him to. The ball rolled and rolled till it brought him to the sea,
where there was a large town. Emelian knocked at a house and asked to be
allowed to stay the night. The people let him in. He went to bed. In the
morning he woke early and heard the father of the house trying to wake
his son to chop some wood. The son would not listen to him. “It is early
yet,” he said, “there’s plenty of time.”

And he heard the mother near the stove say, “Do go, my son. Your
father’s bones ache; surely you wouldn’t let him go? Get up.”

The son only smacked his lips and went to sleep again. He had no sooner
fallen asleep than there was a banging and a rumbling in the street. The
son jumped up, dressed and ran out. Emelian ran out after him to see
what it was that a son obeyed more than father or mother.

When Emelian got outside he saw a man coming up the street carrying some
round object on his belly that he was beating with sticks. It was this
thing that had made the noise and that the son had obeyed. Emelian
approached and examined it. The thing was round like a small tub with
skin drawn tightly on either side of it.

“What is this thing called?” he asked.

“A drum,” they said.

“Is it empty?”

“Yes,” they said.

Emelian wondered and asked the people to give him the thing, but they
would not. Emelian gave up asking and followed the drummer. He walked
about the whole day and when the drummer went to bed at night, Emelian
seized the drum and ran away with it. He ran and ran until he came to
his own town. He wanted to give his wife a surprise, but she was not at
home. She had been taken to the King the day after Emelian had left.

Emelian went to the palace and asked to be announced as the man who had
gone to--I don’t know where and brought back--I don’t know what. The
King was informed of his return and he ordered Emelian to come to him on
the morrow. Emelian again demanded to see the King, saying, “I have
brought back what I was ordered to; let the King come out to me, or I
will go in to him myself.”

The King came out.

“Where have you been?” he asked.

Emelian told him.

“That was not the place,” he said. “And what have you brought?”

Emelian wanted to show him, but the King would not even look.

“That was not the thing,” he said.

“If it is not the thing,” Emelian said, “I must break it and let it go
to the devil.”

Emelian came out of the palace and struck the drum. He had no sooner
done so than all the King’s troops gathered around him. They saluted
Emelian and waited for his commands. From the window of his palace the
King called to the troops, forbidding them to follow Emelian, but the
troops would not listen to the King and followed Emelian. When the King
saw this he ordered Emelian’s wife to be given back to him and he begged
Emelian to give him the drum.

“I can’t,” Emelian said. “I was told to break it and throw the bits into
the river.”

Emelian took the drum to the river and the soldiers followed him.
Emelian struck the drum and broke it into little bits which he threw
into the water and the troops all scattered and dispersed. And Emelian
took his wife back home.

From that day the King left off worrying him and Emelian and his wife
lived happily ever after.




THE GREAT BEAR


A long, long time ago there was a big drought on the earth. All the
rivers dried up and the streams and wells, and the trees withered and
the bushes and grass, and men and beasts died of thirst.

One night a little girl went out with a pitcher to find some water for
her sick mother. She wandered and wandered everywhere, but could find no
water, and she grew so tired that she lay down on the grass and fell
asleep. When she awoke and took up the pitcher she nearly upset the
water it contained. The pitcher was full of clear, fresh water. The
little girl was glad and was about to put it to her lips, but she
remembered her mother and ran home with the pitcher as fast as she
could. She hurried so much that she did not notice a little dog in her
path; she stumbled over it and dropped the pitcher. The dog whined
pitifully; the little girl seized the pitcher.

She thought the water would have been upset, but the pitcher stood
upright and the water was there as before. She poured a little into the
palm of her hand and the dog lapped it and was comforted. When the
little girl again took up the pitcher, it had turned from common wood to
silver. She took the pitcher home and gave it to her mother.

The mother said, “I shall die just the same; you had better drink it,”
and she handed the pitcher to the child. In that moment the pitcher
turned from silver to gold. The little girl could no longer contain
herself and was about to put the pitcher to her lips, when the door
opened and a stranger entered who begged for a drink. The little girl
swallowed her saliva and gave the pitcher to him. And suddenly seven
large diamonds sprang out of the pitcher and a stream of clear, fresh
water flowed from it. And the seven diamonds began to rise, and they
rose higher and higher till they reached the sky and became the Great
Bear.




THREE QUESTIONS


It once occurred to a King that if he knew the right moment when to
begin on any work and the right kind of people to have or not to have
dealings with and the thing to do that was more important than any other
thing, he would always be successful.

And he proclaimed throughout his kingdom that he would give a great
reward to any one who could tell him what was the right moment for any
action, and who were the most essential of all people, and what was the
most essential thing of all to do.

Many learned men came to the King and answered his questions in
different ways.

In answer to the first question some said that to know the right time
for any action, one must draw up a time-table of all the days, months
and years and observe it

[Illustration: THREE QUESTIONS.

_To face page_ 158.]

strictly, then one could do everything at the proper time. Others said
that it was impossible to decide beforehand the proper time for any
action; the only thing one could do was to waste no time in vain
amusements, but to pay attention to what was going on around one, and to
do the thing that came to hand. A third said that however attentive the
King might be to what went on around him, one man alone could not decide
the proper time for every action and that he needed a council of wise
men to advise him. Still a fourth maintained that as certain action had
to be decided at once and could not wait a council the proper thing to
do was to find out beforehand what was going to happen so as to be
always prepared. But as only magicians knew what was going to happen,
then it followed that in order to find out the proper time for any
action one must consult the magicians.

The second question, too, was answered in various ways. Some said that
the most essential people to the King were his helpers and ministers;
others said priests; still others that the most essential people to the
King were doctors; a fourth party said that the most essential people to
the King were soldiers.

To the third question about the most important occupation, some declared
it was science, others, the art of war, and others, divine worship.

The answers being different, the King agreed with none of them and gave
no man the promised reward. But still wishing to find out the answers to
his questions, he resolved to consult a hermit who was famous throughout
the land for his wisdom.

The hermit lived in a wood which he never left, and received none but
common folk. For this reason the King put on simple garments, and,
dismissing his body-guard before he reached the hermit’s cell, he
climbed down from his horse and went the rest of the way alone and on
foot.

He found the hermit digging a bed in front of the hermitage. When the
hermit saw the King, he greeted him and went on with his digging. He was
frail and thin and each time he dug his spade into the ground and
turned over a little soil, he gasped for breath.

The King approached him and said, “I have come, oh, wise hermit, to ask
you to give me the answers to these three questions--what hour must one
remember and not allow to slip by, so as not to regret it afterwards?
What people are the most essential and with whom should one or should
one not have dealings? What things are the most essential to do and
which of those things must one do first of all?”

The hermit heard what the King had to say, but made no reply. He spat on
his hand and went on with his digging.

“You are tired,” the King said; “give me the spade and I will do the
digging for you.”

The King took the spade and began to dig, but after a while he stopped
and repeated his question. The hermit made no reply, but stretched out
his hand for the spade.

“You rest now,” he said, “and I will work.”

But the King would not give up the spade and went on with the digging.
One hour passed and another; the sun began to set behind the trees when
the King stuck his spade into the ground and said, “I came to you, wise
man, to find the answers to my three questions. If you cannot answer
them, then tell me and I will go my way home.”

“Some one is running hither,” the hermit said. “Let us see who it is.”

The King turned and saw a bearded man running towards them. The man’s
hands were clasped over his stomach and the blood flowed from beneath
them. He fell at the King’s feet and lay motionless, rolling his eyes
and moaning faintly.

The King and the hermit unfastened the man’s clothes. He had a large
wound in his stomach. The King bathed it as well as he could with his
handkerchief and bandaged it with the hermit’s towel. The blood did not
cease to flow, and several times the King had to remove the bandages,
soaked with warm blood, and rebathe and rebandage the wound.

When the blood ceased to flow, the wounded man came to himself and
asked for some water. The King brought some fresh water and raised it
to the wounded man’s lips.

The sun had quite set meanwhile and it began to get cold. The King, with
the hermit’s help, carried the wounded man into the cell and put him on
the bed. The wounded man shut his eyes and went to sleep. The King was
so tired with the walk and the work that he curled up by the door and
fell into a sound sleep. He slept through the whole mild summer night,
and when he awoke in the morning he could not make out where he was and
who was the strange bearded man staring at him from the bed with
glistening eyes.

“Forgive me,” the bearded man said in a faint voice, when he saw that
the King was awake and observing him.

“I don’t know you and have nothing to forgive you for,” the King said.

“You don’t know me, but I know you. I am your enemy who vowed to be
revenged on you for having executed my brother and taken away my
property: I knew that you went alone to the hermit and resolved to kill
you on your way back. But the day passed and you did not come. I lost
patience and came out to find you, when I stumbled upon your body-guard.
They recognized me and wounded me. I escaped from them, but would have
died from loss of blood had you not bound my wound. I wanted to kill you
and you saved my life. If I continue to live I will serve you as your
most faithful slave should you desire it, and I will order my sons to do
likewise. Forgive me.”

The King was very glad that he had been able to make peace with his
enemy so easily, and not only forgave him but promised to return his
property and to send him his own servants and physician.

Taking leave of the wounded man the King came out of the cell and sought
for the hermit with his eyes. Before going away he wanted to ask him for
the last time to answer his three questions. The hermit was on his knees
by the beds they had dug yesterday, sowing vegetable seeds.

The King approached him and said, “For the last time, wise man, I ask
you to answer my questions.”

“But they are answered already,” the hermit said, squatting on his
emaciated legs and looking at up the King, who stood before him.

“How?” the King asked.

“Don’t you see?” the hermit began; “had you not pitied my weakness
yesterday and dug these beds for me and gone back alone, the man would
have attacked you and you would have regretted that you had not stayed
with me. The important hour at the time was when you dug these beds, and
I was the most essential person to you, and the most essential act was
to do me a kindness. And later, when the man ran up, the most important
hour was when you looked after him, for, had you not bandaged his wound,
he would have died without making his peace with you. He was the most
essential man to you at that time, and what you did for him was the most
essential thing to be done. Always bear in mind that the most important
time is _now_, for it is the only time we have any power over
ourselves; the most essential man is the one with whom you happen to be
at the moment, because you can never be sure whether you will ever have
relations with any one else, and the most essential thing to do is a
kindness to that man, for it was for this purpose we were sent into the
world.”

[Illustration: THE GODSON.

_To face page_ 167.]




THE GODSON


I

A son was born to a poor peasant. He rejoiced and went to a neighbour to
ask him to stand as godfather to the boy. The neighbour refused. He did
not want to be godfather to a poor man’s son. So the peasant went to
another neighbour and he, too, refused. He walked from house to house,
but could find no one who would be godfather to his son, so he set out
to another village. On his way he met a stranger, who stopped him and
said, “Good day, peasant; where are you going to?”

“God has given me a child,” the peasant said, “to gladden my sight in my
youth, to comfort me in my old age and to pray for my soul when I die.
No one in our village will be godfather to him, so I am going to seek
one elsewhere.”

“Let me be his godfather,” the stranger said.

The peasant rejoiced. He thanked the stranger and said, “But whom shall
I ask to be his godmother?”

“Go into the town,” the stranger said; “in the square you will see a
stone house with shop windows; go in and ask the merchant to let his
daughter stand as godmother to your son.”

The peasant was doubtful.

“But how can I ask a rich merchant? He will be too proud to let his
daughter come to a poor man like me.”

“That won’t be your fault; go and ask him. Have everything ready by the
morning and I’ll come to the christening.”

The peasant went home, then drove into the town to the merchant. He had
no sooner stopped in the yard than the merchant came out.

“What do you want?” he asked.

“God has given me a child,” the peasant said, “to gladden my sight in my
youth, to comfort me in my old age and to pray for my soul when I die.
Will you be kind enough to let your daughter come and be godmother to
the child?”

“When is the christening?”

“To-morrow morning.”

“Very well; go, in God’s name. To-morrow my daughter will be at the
church.”

The next day the godmother and godfather came; the child was christened,
but directly after the christening the godfather disappeared. No one
knew who he was and no one saw him from that day.


II

The child grew up to the parents’ great joy; and he was strong and
industrious and clever and humble. When he was ten years old the parents
sent him to school, and what it took others five years to learn the boy
learnt in one. And there was no one in the village who could teach him
more.

Easter came round and the boy went to his godmother to give her the
Easter greeting. When he returned home he said, “Father and mother,
where does my godfather live? I should like to give him the Easter
greeting, too.”

And the father said, “We don’t know where your godfather lives, dear
son. We, too, have worried over that. We have not seen him since you
were christened. We have not heard of him and don’t know where he lives,
nor whether he is alive at all.”

The boy bowed to his father and mother.

“Let me go,” he said, “to seek my godfather. I want to find him and give
him the Easter greeting.”

The father and mother gave their consent and the boy set out to find his
godfather.


III

The boy left the house and set out on his way. About midday he met a
stranger and the stranger stopped and said, “Good day to you, boy. Where
are you going?”

And the boy said, “I went to my godmother to give her the Easter
greeting and when I returned home I asked my parents where my godfather
lived, because I wanted to give him the greeting too, but my parents
said, ‘We don’t know where your godfather lives, dear son. We have not
heard of him since you were christened and we don’t know anything about
him, or whether he is alive at all.’ And I wanted to see my godfather,
so I am going to find him.”

“I am your godfather,” the stranger said.

The boy rejoiced and gave him the Easter greeting.

“Where are you going to, godfather? If you are going in our direction
come in to us, or if you are going home, may I come with you?”

And the stranger said, “I have no time to come to you now, because I
have some business in the villages. I shall not be home until to-morrow,
then you can come to me if you like.”

“But how shall I find you, godfather?”

“Walk straight towards the east until you come to a wood in the midst of
which you will find a clearing. Sit down to rest in that clearing and
look about you to see what is happening. When you come out of the wood
you will see a garden and in the garden is a house with a golden roof.
That is my house. Go in at the gate; I will meet you there myself.”

Saying these words the godfather vanished from the godson’s sight.


IV

The boy followed the godfather’s directions. He wandered and wandered
till he came to a wood and found the clearing, and in the midst of the
clearing stood a pine tree to a branch of which a heavy block of oak was
attached with string, and beneath the block was a trough of honey. As
the boy was wondering why the honey and the block were there, a
crackling was heard among the trees and out came a family of bears. The
mother came in front and a yearling and some cubs followed behind. The
mother, sniffing the air, went straight to the trough, the cubs
following. She thrust her muzzle into the honey and called to the cubs
to do the same. They scampered up and thrust in their muzzles. The block
swung back a little and returning, hit against the cubs. When the mother
saw this, she shoved the block away with her paw. The block swung back
further, and returning more forcibly struck one cub on the back, another
on the head. The cubs jumped away, howling with pain. The mother bear
growled, and seizing the block in her fore-paws, flung it away from her
violently. The block flew up high. The yearling ran up to the trough,
thrust his muzzle into the honey, the other cubs followed him, but no
sooner had they got there than the block swung back, struck the yearling
on the head and killed him. The mother-bear growled more angrily as she
seized the block and flung it away with all her might. The block flew
higher than the branch, the string it was tied to even slackened; the
mother-bear and the cubs came up to the trough; the block flew higher
and higher, then stopped and began to descend; the lower it got the
swifter became its course. It crashed down on the mother-bear’s head.
She fell over; her legs twitched and she died. The cubs ran away into
the wood.


V

The boy wondered and went on further. He came to a large garden and in
the garden was a high house with a golden roof. At the gate stood his
godfather, smiling. He greeted his godson, made him come inside the gate
and took him round the garden. He had never even dreamt of such beauty
and joy as there was in that garden.

The godfather took the boy into the house and he found that more
wonderful still. The godfather showed him all the rooms--one more
beautiful than the other--then he brought him to a sealed door. “Do you
see this door?” he asked. “It is not locked, only sealed. It can be
opened, but I forbid you to do it. You can live here and go where you
like and do what you like; taste of every pleasure; I forbid you only
one thing--to pass that door. But if it should happen that you do go in,
remember what you saw in the wood.” With these words the godfather went
away, and the godson was left alone. His life was so full of pleasure
and such a happy one that when he had been there thirty years it seemed
to him no more than three hours. Thus the thirty years passed and the
godson came to the sealed door, thinking, “I wonder why my godfather
forbade me to go into this room? I will go in and see what is there.”

He pushed the door; the seal gave way and the door opened. The godson
went in and saw that the room was large and more beautiful than all the
others, and in the middle of it stood a golden throne. The godson
wandered and wandered over the room; then he stopped by the throne,
mounted the steps and sat down. He saw a sceptre by the throne and he
took it up in his hand. He had no sooner touched the sceptre than the
walls of the room rolled asunder. The godson looked about and saw the
whole world and everything people were doing in it. Straight before him
was the sea and ships sailing on it. To the right were foreign lands,
where heathens lived. To the left were Christians, but not Russians. On
the fourth side were our own Russian people.

“I will look and see what is happening at home,” he said. “I wonder if
the corn is good this year?”

He looked at his father’s fields and saw the sheaves standing in them.
He began to count the sheaves to see if the harvest had been good, when
he saw a cart coming over the field with a peasant sitting in it. He
looked closer and saw that it was Vasily, a thief. Vasily stopped by the
sheaves and began putting them into the cart. The godson could not
endure this and cried aloud, “Father, they are stealing your sheaves!”

The father awoke in the night. “I dreamt that some one was stealing my
sheaves,” he said; “I will go and see.” He got upon his horse and rode
out.

When he got to the fields he saw Vasily and called aloud for help. Some
peasants came up. Vasily was beaten, bound and taken to prison.

The godson then looked towards the town where his godmother lived and
saw that she had married a merchant. She was lying in bed and her
husband got up to leave her to go to another woman. And the godson
cried aloud to his godmother, “Get up! Your husband is going to do
something wicked!”

The godmother jumped up, dressed and set out to find her husband. She
brought him to shame, beat the other woman and would not take her
husband back again.

The godson looked again towards his home and saw his mother lying in the
house and that a robber had stolen in and was breaking open a trunk. The
mother awoke and cried out in terror. The robber raised his axe, and was
about to kill her, but the godson could endure no more; he thrust the
sceptre straight into the robber’s temple and killed him on the spot.


VI

He had no sooner slain the robber than the walls rose up again and the
room became as before.

The door opened and the godfather entered. He approached the godson,
took him by the hand, led him from the throne and said, “You did not
obey my commands. You did one wrong thing in opening the forbidden
door, another when you mounted the throne and took my sceptre into your
hand, and a third wrong, which has added to the evil in the world. Had
you sat on the throne an hour longer, you would have ruined half
mankind.”

And the godfather once more led the godson up to the throne and he took
the sceptre in his hand and the walls rolled asunder.

And the godfather said, “See what you have done to your father. Vasily
sat in prison for a year and learnt every kind of wickedness and came
out completely corrupted. See, he has driven off two of your father’s
horses and is now setting fire to his barns. This is what you have done
to your father.”

As soon as the godson saw his father’s barns burst into flame the
godfather hid the view from his sight and bade him look in another
direction.

“See,” he said; “it is now a year since your godmother’s husband left
her, and he goes after other women and his wife has taken to drink and
his former mistress has fallen to still lower depths. This is what you
have done to your godmother.”

This sight, too, he hid from the godson’s gaze and bade him look towards
his own home. His mother was weeping and saying, “It would have been
better if the robber had killed me than that I should have so many sins
on my soul.”

“This is what you have done to your mother.”

This sight, too, the godfather shut out and bade the godson look below.
And he saw two keepers guarding the robber in a dungeon.

And the godfather said, “This man has killed nine people. He should have
atoned for his sins himself, but in killing him you have taken them upon
your own soul. Now you must answer for all his sins. This is what you
have done to yourself. When the mother-bear first pushed the block aside
she merely disturbed her cubs; when she pushed it a second time, she
killed her yearling; when she pushed it a third time, she was killed
herself. You have done exactly the same. I give you a term of thirty
years. Go into the world and atone for the robber’s sins; if you fail to
do so, you will have to take his place.”

“But how shall I atone for his sins?” the godson asked.

And the godfather said, “When you have rid the world of as much evil as
you brought into it, then you will have atoned for your own and the
robber’s sins.”

And the godson asked, “How can I rid the world of evil?”

And the godfather said, “Walk straight towards the east until you come
to some fields on which you will find some people. Take note of what
they are doing and teach them what you know, then go on further,
observing everything on the way. On the fourth day you will come to a
wood in which you will find a cell, and in this cell a hermit lives.
Tell this hermit all that has happened and he will instruct you in what
you are to do. When you have done all that the hermit has told you, you
will have atoned for your own and the robber’s sins.”

With these words the godfather put the godson out at the gate.


VII

And the godson set out, thinking as he walked, “How can I rid the world
of evil? People rid the world of evil by banishing evil men or putting
them in prison or executing them. But how can I rid the world of evil
without taking other men’s sins upon myself?” And the godson wondered
and wondered, but could come to no decision.

He wandered and wandered till he came to a field on which tall rich corn
was growing, ready to be harvested. And the godson saw a calf that had
strayed in among the corn and he saw men on horseback chasing the calf
this way and that and trampling down the corn. Each time the calf was
about to come out of the corn some one rode up and the calf got
frightened and ran back again, the men after it. In the road stood a
woman, crying, “They will chase my calf to death!”

And the godson said to the men, “What are you doing? Come out of the
corn and let the woman call to her calf.”

The men did so. The woman came up to the edge of the field and called to
the calf, who pricked up its ears, listening awhile, then it ran towards
her and buried its nose in her skirts, nearly knocking her down. The men
were glad, and the woman was glad, and the calf, too, was glad.

The godson went on his way thinking, “I see that evil breeds evil. The
more people try to drive away evil, the more the evil grows, which shows
that it is impossible to drive out evil by evil. But how can one drive
it out? I don’t know. It is well that the calf obeyed its mistress; if
it had not done so, how should we have got it out of the corn?”

And the godson wondered and wondered, but could come to no decision and
went on further.


VIII

He wandered and wandered till he came to a village where he asked to be
allowed to stay the night at the first house. The mistress let him in.
Besides herself no one was in the house. The mistress was busy
cleaning.

When the godson came in he climbed on to the stove and began watching to
see what the mistress was doing. She had finished cleaning the floor and
was scrubbing the table. She scrubbed it and wiped it with a dirty
cloth. She rubbed the cloth one way, but the table would not come clean.
The cloth left streaks of dirt. She rubbed it the other way--the first
streaks came out, new ones were made. She rubbed it lengthwise again and
the same thing happened. The dirty cloth rubbed out one streak of dirt
and left another. The godson watched for some time and then said, “What
are you doing, mistress?”

“Don’t you see that I’m cleaning the house for the festival? I can’t get
the table clean, anyhow. The dirt will not come off and I’m quite worn
out.”

“You should rinse out the cloth, then wipe the table.”

The mistress did as he told her and the table came clean. “Thank you,”
she said, “for your lesson.”

In the morning the godson took leave of the mistress and went on
further. He wandered and wandered till he came to a wood where he saw
some peasants making hoops. He approached them and saw them struggling
and struggling, but they could not bend the wood. He looked closer and
saw that the block on which they were working was not firmly fixed. And
the godson said, “What are you doing, brothers?”

“Making hoops, as you see. We have steamed the wood twice, yet cannot
bend it. We are quite worn out.”

“You should fix the block more firmly, mates. It moves round with you as
it is.”

The peasants did so and their work went smoothly afterwards.

The godson stayed the night with them, then went on his way. He walked
the whole of that day and the night and just before daybreak he came
upon some shepherds encamped for the night, and joined them. They had
settled their cattle and were trying to light a fire. They took some dry
twigs and lighted them, and not giving them time to burn up, they put
some damp brushwood on top and smothered the fire. The shepherds took
some more dry twigs and lighted them, and again they smothered the fire
with damp brushwood. For a long time they struggled, but could get no
fire.

And the godson said, “Don’t be in such a hurry to put on the brushwood,
but wait until the twigs have caught well. When the fire gets hot then
you can put on the brushwood.”

The shepherds did as he told them. When the twigs had caught well, they
put on the brushwood, and in a few minutes they had a blazing fire.

The godson stayed with them for a while then went on further. He
wondered what these three things he had seen might mean, but could not
understand, nor see the reason of them.


IX

The godson wandered and wandered until nightfall, when he came to a
wood, and in the wood was a cell. He went up to the cell and knocked at
the door.

A voice from within asked, “Who is that?”

“A great sinner. I have come to atone for the sins of another.”

And the hermit asked, “What are these sins you have taken upon
yourself?”

And the godson told him everything about his godfather and the
mother-bear and the cubs and about the throne in the sealed room, and
about his godfather’s commands, and about the peasants who had trampled
the corn in the field, and the calf that had come to its mistress at her
call.

“I know now,” he said, “that you cannot drive out evil by evil, but I
don’t know how it can be driven out and I want you to tell me.”

And the hermit said, “Tell me what else you have seen on the way?”

The godson told him about the woman and how she had tried to clean the
table, and of the peasants who had tried to make the hoops, and the
shepherds who had tried to light a fire.

The hermit waited until he had finished, then he went into his cell and
brought out a jagged axe.

“Come,” he said.

The hermit walked away from the cell and pointed to a tree. “Cut it
down,” he said.

The godson felled it.

“Chop it into three parts.”

The godson chopped it into three parts. The hermit again went into his
cell and brought out a light.

“Set fire to those three logs,” he said.

The godson made a fire and burnt the three logs till only three pieces
of charcoal were left.

“Now plant them half into the ground, like this.”

The godson planted them.

“Do you see a river there by that hill? Fetch some water in your mouth
and water them. Water this one in the way you taught the woman to clean,
this one in the way you taught the hoopers, and this one in the way you
taught the shepherds. When the three pieces of charcoal grow into
apple-trees you will know how to rid the world of evil, and will then
have atoned for your sins.”

With these words the hermit went into his cell. The godson pondered and
pondered and could not understand what the hermit had said, but he did
what the hermit had told him.


X

The godson went to the river, filled his mouth with water and watered
one piece of charcoal; then he went again and again, until he had
watered the other two. The godson was tired and hungry. He went to the
hermit’s cell to ask for some food. When he opened the door there was
the hermit lying dead on a bench. The godson looked about the cell and
found some rusks, which he ate; then he discovered a spade and went out
to dig a grave for the old man. By night he carried water to water the
pieces of charcoal, and by day he dug the grave. He had no sooner
finished it and was about to bury the hermit, when some people came from
the village to bring the hermit food.

When the people heard that the hermit was dead they asked the godson to
take his place. They buried the hermit, left the bread with the godson
and went away, promising to bring him more food later on.

And the godson fell into the hermit’s place and he lived and nourished
himself with the food people brought him, and went on watering the
pieces of charcoal as the hermit had bidden him do.

The godson lived thus for a year and many people began to visit him. He
grew famous throughout the country as a saint who saved his soul by
carrying water in his mouth from beneath a hill, and watering stumps of
charcoal. People flocked to him. Rich merchants brought him gifts, but
the godson used nothing but what he needed, giving the rest to the poor.

And the godson began to live thus--for half the day he carried water in
his mouth to water the pieces of charcoal, for the other half he rested
and received people.

And the godson came to think that he had been told to live thus and that
in this way he would atone for his sins.

The godson lived thus for another year, not missing a single day for
watering the charcoal, yet not a single piece had begun to sprout.

One day when he was sitting in his cell he heard a horseman gallop past,
singing to himself. The hermit came out to see what manner of man he
was. And he saw that the man was young and strong and was dressed in
fine clothes and seated on a spirited horse.

The godson stopped him and asked him who he was and where he was going.
The man pulled up.

“I am a robber,” he said; “I roam the highway and kill whomever I have a
mind to. The more men I kill the merrier are my songs.”

The godson was horrified and thought, “How can one destroy evil in such
a man? It is well to talk to the people who come to me; they repent of
their own accord, but this man glories in the evil he does.” The godson
said nothing to him and turned away, thinking, “What shall I do? If this
robber makes up his mind to stay here, he will scare away my people and
no one will come to see me. They will lose some good thereby, and I
shall have nothing to live on.”

And the godson stopped and said to the robber, “People come to me not to
boast of the evil they do, but to repent and pray for their sins to be
forgiven them. You repent likewise, if you have the fear of God in your
heart, and if you do not seek repentance, go away from this place and do
not come back again, so as not to hinder me or scare away my people. If
you fail to listen to my words God will punish you.”

The robber laughed.

“I am not afraid of your God and I won’t listen to you. You are not my
master to order me about. You live by your piety, I by my robbery. We
must all live. Teach the women who come to you, but let me alone. Since
you have dared to mention the name of God to me I will kill two extra
people to-morrow. I would kill you now, only I don’t want to soil my
hands, but take care never to cross my path again.”

The robber threatened him thus and rode away. He did not come again and
the godson lived in the hermitage as before for another eight years.


XI

One night the godson set out to water his pieces of charcoal and when he
had finished he sat down in his cell to rest. He peered along the path
now and again to see if any visitor was coming, but no one came that
day. The godson sat alone until evening and he grew lonesome and weary
and began to think about his life. He recollected how the robber had
reproached him for living by his piety. He began to look back upon his
life. “I am not living as the hermit told me,” he thought. “The hermit
imposed a penance on me and I have used it as a means of earning my
bread and even gaining fame thereby. I have been so led astray over it
that I am even dull when people do not come to see me, and when they do
come, I rejoice when they praise my saintliness. This is not the way one
must live. I have been blinded by fame. Not only have I not atoned for
past sins but have taken new ones upon myself. I will go away to
another place far into the wood, where the people will not find me, and
I will live alone there and atone for my past sins, taking care not to
commit new ones.”

Thinking thus the godson took a bag of rusks and a spade, and he left
the cell and set out down a ravine to build himself a mud hut in the
thicket and disappear from people’s sight.

The godson was walking along with his bag and spade when the robber
jumped out upon him. The godson was afraid and would have run away, but
the robber stopped him.

“Where are you going?” he asked.

The godson told him that he wanted to go away from people and bury
himself in a wild part of the wood where no one would come to him.

The robber wondered.

“But what will you live on if no one comes to see you?”

The godson had not thought of that, but now the robber had mentioned it
he remembered that he had to eat.

“On what God gives,” he said.

The robber made no reply and went his way.

“Why didn’t I say anything to him about his life?” the godson thought.
“He may be repentant now. He seemed softer of manner and did not
threaten to kill me to-day.” And he called to the robber saying, “It is
time you repented. You cannot get away from God.”

The robber turned his horse round, seized a knife from his girdle and
brandished it aloft. The godson took fright and ran away into the wood.

The robber did not trouble to go after him, he merely said, “I have let
you off twice, old man; take care not to come my way a third time, or
I’ll kill you.”

With these words the robber rode away.

That evening the godson went to water his pieces of charcoal and behold!
one of the pieces had sprouted! A young apple-tree had shot forth.


XII

The godson hid himself from the eyes of men and began to live alone.
His rusks were all gone. “I must hunt for some roots,” he thought, but
he had no sooner gone out than he saw a bag of rusks hanging on the
branch of a tree. He took the bag and began to eat.

When that was all gone he found another bag in the very same place. Thus
the godson lived. He had only one care--his fear of the robber. When he
heard him coming he hid himself, thinking, “If he kills me I shall not
be able to atone for my sins.”

Another ten years passed. One apple-tree grew up, the other pieces of
charcoal remained as they were before.

One day the godson went out early to do his watering. He moistened the
soil around the stumps until he was tired and sat down to rest. As he
rested he thought, “I have sinned greatly in fearing death. If it be
God’s will I will atone for my sins by death even.”

The thought had no sooner occurred to him than he heard the robber come
along cursing at some one. And the godson thought, “Besides God no one
can do me either good or evil.” And he went to meet the robber. He saw
that the robber was not alone. On the saddle, behind him, was another
man, and this man’s hands were bound and his mouth was gagged. The man
made no sound and the robber kept on abusing him. The godson approached
the robber and stopped before his horse.

“Where are you taking this man to?” he asked.

“Into the wood. He is a merchant’s son and won’t tell me where his
father’s money is hidden. I will keep him prisoner until he tells me.”

The robber was about to go on, but the godson would not let him, seizing
the horse by the bridle.

“Let the man go,” he said.

The robber grew angry and raised his arm to strike him.

“Do you want to share his fate? I told you I would kill you. Let go!”

The godson was not afraid.

“I won’t let go,” he said. “I’m not afraid of you; I only fear God. He
tells me not to let go. Set the man free.”

The robber frowned; he seized the knife from his girdle, cut the cords
and released the merchant’s son.

“Be gone, the two of you!” he said, “and don’t come across my path a
second time!”

The merchant’s son fled. The robber was about to go, but the godson
stopped him and once more beseeched him to abandon his wicked life. The
robber stood and listened without saying a word, then turned and rode
away.

In the morning the godson went to water his pieces of charcoal. Behold!
another one had burst forth, another apple-tree had grown!


XIII

Ten more years passed. The godson lived desiring nothing, afraid of
nothing, and a feeling of gladness always at his heart. And he thought
one day, “What blessings the good Lord gives us! And we torment
ourselves for nothing. People should live in joy and happiness.” And he
remembered the evil men suffered and how they tormented themselves and
he grew to pity them. “It is in vain that I live as I do,” he thought;
“I must go among people and tell them what I know.”

The thought had no sooner occurred to him than he heard the robber come
along, but he took no notice of him, thinking, “What is the use of
talking to that man? He will not understand.”

This was his first thought, but in a little while he repented of it and
went out in the road. The robber sat on his horse, frowning and looking
at the ground. When the godson saw him, a feeling of pity came over him;
he rushed up and seized the robber’s knee.

“My dear brother,” he said, “take pity on your soul! Don’t you know that
the spirit of God is in you? You torment yourself and others, and as
time goes on your torments will grow worse, and God loves you and wants
to heap His blessings upon you. Don’t destroy yourself, brother; change
your way of life.”

The robber frowned and turned away. “Leave me alone,” he said.

The godson clutched the robber’s knee still firmer and the tears stood
in his eyes. The robber raised his eyes to his, gazed into them for a
long time, then climbed down from his horse and fell on his knees before
the godson.

“You have subdued me, old man,” he said. “For twenty years I struggled
against you, but you have won. I am powerless before you. Do what you
want with me. When you spoke to me the first time, I grew more hardened
still. I only began to take your words to heart when you went away from
people and I knew that you needed nothing from them. It was then I began
to supply you with rusks.”

And the godson recollected that the woman had only managed to clean the
table after she had washed the cloth. When he ceased to care for himself
and cleansed his heart, he was able to cleanse the hearts of others.

And the robber continued, “And my heart turned when I saw that you had
no fear of death.”

And the godson remembered that the hoopers began to bend the hoops only
when they had made the block firm. When he ceased to fear death and
established his life firmly in God he had been able to subdue this man’s
wild heart.

And the robber said, “And the heart in me melted altogether when I saw
that you pitied me and wept before me.”

The godson rejoiced. He led the robber to the place where his pieces of
charcoal were planted and behold! a third apple-tree had grown. And the
godson remembered that when the shepherds had allowed their dry twigs to
catch well, a big fire blazed up. It was only when his heart grew warm
that he had been able to kindle the heart of another.

And the godson rejoiced that he had now atoned for all his sins.

He told the robber everything and died. The robber buried him and began
to live as the godson had told him, and to teach other men what he knew.

                          Printed in England
       by Butler & Tanner Selwood Printing Works Frome, Somerset

       *       *       *       *       *

    e-text transcriber note:

    Information was cropped off when the book used as a scan
    source was rebound. Emailed University of Southern Mississippi
    Libraries, and received confirmation from a librarian there
    concerning missing page references on plates:

    1: The frontispiece has the word "Frontispiece.", in italics,
       no bracket, lower left.
    2: The plate which faces page 56 in the TIA copy should face
       page 57 (was probably positioned incorrectly when rebound).
    3: For plate facing page 82, bottom right reference reads,
       "[To face page 82."
    4: For plate facing page 158, bottom right reference reads,
       "[To face page 158."
    5: For the plate facing page 166, the plate actually says
       "[To face page 166."--but it faces 167 instead.

    --srjfoo, 2016-02-15







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tolstoi for the young, by Leo Tolstoi

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOLSTOI FOR THE YOUNG ***

***** This file should be named 51708-0.txt or 51708-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/7/0/51708/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
