The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rendezvous, by Ivan Turgenev

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Rendezvous
       1907

Author: Ivan Turgenev

Translator: Herman Bernstein

Release Date: October 17, 2007 [EBook #23056]
Last Updated: October 26, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RENDEZVOUS ***




Produced by David Widger





THE RENDEZVOUS

By Ivan Turgenev

Translated by Herman Bernstein.

Copyright, 1907, by P. P. Collier & Son.


I was sitting in a birch grove in autumn, near the middle of September.
It had been drizzling ever since morning; occasionally the sun shone
warmly;--the weather was changeable. Now the sky was overcast with
watery white clouds, now it suddenly cleared up for an instant, and then
the bright, soft azure, like a beautiful eye, appeared from beyond the
dispersed clouds. I was sitting looking about me and listening. The
leaves were slightly rustling over my head; and by their very rustle one
could tell what season of the year it was. It was not the gay, laughing
palpitation of spring; not a soft whispering, nor the lingering chatter
of summer, nor the timid and cold lisping of late autumn, but a barely
audible, drowsy prattle. A faint breeze was whisking over the tree-tops.
The interior of the grove, moist from the rain, was forever changing,
as the sun shone or hid beyond the clouds; now the grove was all
illuminated as if everything in it had burst into a smile; the trunks of
the birch trees suddenly assumed the soft reflection of white silk;
the small leaves which lay scattered on the ground all at once became
variegated and flashed up like red gold; and the pretty stalks of the
tall, branchy ferns, already tinted in their autumn hue, resembling the
color of overripe grapes, appeared here and there tangling and crossing
one another. Now again everything suddenly turned blue; the bright
colors died out instantaneously, the birch trees stood all white,
lustreless, like snow which had not yet been touched by the coldly
playing rays of the winter sun--and stealthily, slyly, a drizzling rain
began to sprinkle and whisper over the forest. The leaves on the birches
were almost all green yet, though they had turned somewhat pale; only
here and there stood a solitary young little birch, all red or all
golden, and one should have seen how brightly these birches flushed in
the sun when its rays suddenly appeared gliding and flashing through the
dense net of the thin branches which had just been washed around by the
sparkling rain. Not a single bird was heard; all had found shelter, and
were silent; only rarely the mocking voice of the bluebird sang out like
a little steel bell. Before stopping in this birch forest I passed
with my dog through a poplar grove. I confess I am not very fond of the
poplar tree with its pale lilac-colored trunk and its grayish-green,
metallic leaves, which it lifts high and spreads in the air like a
trembling fan--I do not like the constant shaking of its round, untidy
leaves, which are so awkwardly attached to long stems. The poplar is
pretty only on certain summer evenings when, rising high amid the low
shrubbery, it stands against the red rays of the setting sun, shining
and trembling, bathed from root to top in uniform yellowish purple--or
when, on a clear windy day, it rocks noisily, lisping against the blue
sky, and each leaf seems as if eager to tear itself away, to fly and
hurry off into the distance. But in general I do not like this tree,
and, therefore, not stopping to rest in the poplar grove, I made my
way to the birch forest, and seated myself under a tree whose branches
started near the ground, and thus could protect me from the rain. Having
admired the surrounding view, I fell asleep--I slept that tranquil,
sweet sleep which is familiar to hunters only.

I can not say how long I slept, but when I opened my eyes the entire
interior of the forest was filled with sunshine, and everywhere the
bright blue sky was flashing through the cheerfully droning leaves; the
clouds disappeared, driven asunder by the wind which had begun to play;
the weather was clear now, and one felt in the air that peculiar, dry
freshness which, filling the heart with a certain vigorous sensation,
almost always predicts a quiet, clear night after a rainy day. I was
about to rise and try my luck at hunting again, when my eyes suddenly
fell on a motionless human figure. I gassed at it fixedly; it was a
young peasant girl. She was sitting some twenty feet away from me, her
head bowed pensively and her hands dropped on her knees; in one hand,
which was half open, lay a heavy bunch of field flowers, and every time
she breathed the flowers were softly gliding over her checkered skirt.
A clear white shirt, buttoned at the neck and the wrists, fell in short,
soft folds about her waist; large yellow beads were hanging down from
her neck on her bosom in two rows. She was not at all bad-looking. Her
heavy fair hair, of a beautiful ash color, parted in two neatly combed
half-circles from under a narrow, dark-red head-band, which was pulled
down almost to her ivory-white forehead; the rest of her face was
slightly tanned with the golden sunburn peculiar to a tender skin. I
could not see her eyes--she did not lift them; but I saw her thin, high
eyebrows, her long lashes; these were moist, and on her cheek gleamed
a dried-up teardrop, which had stopped near her somewhat pale lips. Her
entire small head was very charming; even her somewhat thick and round
nose did not spoil it. I liked especially the expression of her face;
it was so simple and gentle, so sad and so full of childish perplexity
before her own sadness. She was apparently waiting for some one.
Something cracked faintly in the forest. Immediately she raised her head
and looked around; her eyes flashed quickly before me in the transparent
shade--they were large, bright, and shy like a deer’s. She listened for
a few seconds, not moving her wide-open eyes from the spot whence the
faint sound had come; she heaved a sigh, turned her head slowly, bent
down still lower and began to examine the flowers. Her eyelids turned
red, her lips quivered bitterly and a new teardrop rolled down from
under her heavy eyelashes, stopping and sparkling on her cheek. Thus
quite a long while passed; the poor girl did hot stir--only occasionally
she moved her hands and listened--listened all the time. Something
cracked once more in the forest--she started. This time the noise did
not stop, it was becoming more distinct, it was nearing--at last firm
footsteps were heard. She straightened herself, and it seemed as if
she lost her courage, for her eyes began to quiver. The figure of a man
appeared through the jungle. She looked fixedly, suddenly flushed, and,
smiling joyously and happily, seemed about to rise, but she immediately
cast down her head again, turned pale, confused--only then she lifted
her quivering, almost prayerful, eyes to the man as he paused beside
her.

I looked at him from my hiding-place with curiosity. I confess he did
not produce a pleasant impression upon me. He was, by all appearances,
a spoiled valet of some rich young man. His clothes betokened a claim to
taste and smart carelessness. He wore a short top-coat of bronze color,
which evidently belonged to his master, and which was buttoned up to
the very top; he had on a pink necktie with lilac-colored edges; and his
black velvet cap, trimmed with gold stripes, was pulled over his very
eyebrows. The round collar of his white shirt propped his ears up and
cut his cheeks mercilessly, and the starched cuffs covered his hands up
to his red, crooked fingers, which were ornamented with silver and gold
rings, set with forget-me-nots of turquoise. His red, fresh, impudent
face belonged to those countenances which, as far as I have observed,
are almost always repulsive to men, but, unfortunately, are often
admired by women. Apparently trying to give an expression of contempt
and of weariness to his rough features, he was forever closing his
small, milky-gray eyes, knitting his brows, lowering the corners of his
lips, yawning forcedly, and, with careless, although not too clever,
ease, now adjusting his reddish, smartly twisted temple-curls, now
fingering the yellow hair which bristled upon his thick upper lip--in a
word, he was making an insufferable display of himself. He started to do
this as soon as he noticed the young peasant girl who was awaiting him.
He advanced to her slowly, with large strides, then stood for a while,
twitched his shoulders, thrust both hands into the pockets of his coat,
and, casting a quick and indifferent glance at the poor girl, sank down
on the ground.

“Well?” he began, continuing to look aside, shaking his foot and
yawning. “Have you waited long?”

The girl could not answer him at once.

“Long, Victor Alexandrich,” she said at last, in a scarcely audible
voice.

“Ah!” He removed his cap, majestically passed his hand over his thick,
curly hair whose roots started almost at his eyebrows, and, looking
around with dignity, covered his precious head again cautiously. “And I
almost forgot all about it. Besides, you see, it’s raining.” He yawned
again. “I have a lot of work to do; you can’t look after everything, and
he is yet scolding. We are leaving to-morrow--”

“To-morrow?” uttered the girl, and fixed a frightened look upon him.

“To-morrow--Come, come, come, please,” he replied quickly, vexed,
noticing that she quivered, and bowed her head in silence. “Please,
Akulina, don’t cry. You know I can’t bear it” (and he twitched his flat
nose). “If you don’t stop, I’ll leave you right away. What nonsense--to
whimper!”

“Well, I shan’t, I shan’t,” said Akulina hastily, swallowing the tears
with an effort. “So you’re going away to-morrow?” she added, after
a brief silence. “When will it please God to have me meet you again,
Victor Alexandrich?”

“We’ll meet, we’ll meet again. If it isn’t next year, it’ll be later. My
master, it seems, wants to enter the service in St. Petersburg,” he went
on, pronouncing the words carelessly and somewhat indistinctly. “And it
may be that we’ll go abroad.”

“You will forget me, Victor Alexandrich,” said Akulina sadly.

“No--why should I? I’ll not forget you, only you had rallier be
sensible; don’t make a fool of yourself; obey your father--And I’ll not
forget you--Oh, no; oh, no.” And he stretched himself calmly and yawned
again.

“Do not forget me, Victor Alexandrich,” she resumed in a beseeching
voice. “I have loved you so much, it seems--all, it seems, for you--You
tell me to obey father, Victor Alexandrich--How am I to obey my
father--?”

“How’s that?” He pronounced these words as if from the stomach, lying on
his back and holding his hands under his head.

“Why, Victor Alexandrich--you know it yourself--”

She fell silent. Victor fingered his steel watch-chain.

“Akulina, you are not a foolish girl,” he said at last, “therefore don’t
talk nonsense. It’s for your own good, do you understand me? Of course,
you are not foolish, you’re not altogether a peasant, so to say, and
your mother wasn’t always a peasant either. Still, you are without
education--therefore you must obey when you are told to.”

“But it’s terrible, Victor Alexandrich.”

“Oh, what nonsense, my dear--what is she afraid of! What is that you
have there,” he added, moving close to her, “flowers?”

“Flowers,” replied Akulina sadly. “I have picked some field tansies,”
 she went on, with some animation. “They’re good for the calves, And here
I have some marigolds--for scrofula. Here, look, what a pretty flower!
I haven’t seen such a pretty flower in all my life. Here are
forget-me-nots, and--and these I have picked for you,” she added, taking
from under the tansies a small bunch of cornflowers, tied around with a
thin blade of grass; “do you want them?”

Victor held out his hand lazily, took the flowers, smelt them
carelessly, and began to turn them around in his fingers, looking up
with thoughtful importance. Akulina gazed at him. There was so much
tender devotion, reverent obedience, and love in her pensive eyes. She
at once feared him, and yet she dared not cry, and inwardly she bade him
farewell, and admired him for the last time; and he lay there, stretched
out like a sultan, and endured her admiration with magnanimous patience
and condescension. I confess I was filled with indignation as I looked
at his red face, which betrayed satisfied selfishness through his
feigned contempt and indifference. Akulina was so beautiful at this
moment. All her soul opened before him trustingly and passionately;--it
reached out to him, caressed him, and he--He dropped the cornflowers on
the grass, took out from the side-pocket of his coat a round glass in a
bronze frame and began to force it into his eye; but no matter how hard
he tried to hold it with his knitted brow, his raised cheek, and even
with his nose, the glass dropped out and fell into his hands.

“What’s this?” asked Akulina at last, with surprise.

“A lorgnette,” he replied importantly.

“What is it for?”

“To see better.”

“Let me see it.”

Victor frowned, but gave her the glass.

“Look out; don’t break it.”

“Don’t be afraid, I’ll not break it.” She lifted it timidly to her eye.

“I can’t see anything,” she said naively.

“Shut your eye,” he retorted in the tone of a dissatisfied teacher. She
closed the eye before which she held the glass.

“Not that eye, not that one, you fool! The other one!” exclaimed Victor,
and, not allowing her to correct her mistake, he took the lorgnette away
from her.

Akulina blushed, laughed slightly, and turned away.

“It seems it’s not for us.”

“Of course not!”

The poor girl maintained silence, and heaved a deep sigh.

“Oh, Victor Alexandrich, how will I get along without you?” she said
suddenly.

Victor wiped the lorgnette and put it back into his pocket.

“Yes, yes,” he said at last. “At first it will really be hard for you.”
 He tapped her on the shoulder condescendingly; she quietly took his hand
from her shoulder and kissed it. “Well, yes, yes, you are indeed a good
girl,” he went on, with a self-satisfied smile; “but it can’t be helped!
Consider it yourself! My master and I can’t stay here, can we? Winter is
near, and to pass the winter in the country is simply nasty--you know
it yourself. It’s a different thing in St. Petersburg! There are such
wonders over there that you could not imagine even in your dreams, you
silly--What houses, what streets, and society, education--it’s something
wonderful!--” Akulina listened to him with close attention, slightly
opening her lips like a child. “However,” he added, wriggling on the
ground, “why do I say all this to you? You can’t understand it anyway!”

“Why not, Victor Alexandrich? I understood, I understood everything.”

“Just think of her!”

Akulina cast down her eyes.

“You did not speak to me like this before, Victor Alexandrich,” she
said, without lifting her eyes.

“Before?--Before! Just think of her!--Before!” he remarked, indignantly.

Both grew silent.

“However, it’s time for me to go,” said Victor, and leaned on his elbow,
about to rise.

“Wait a little,” said Akulina in an imploring voice.

“What for? I have already said to you, Good-by!”

“Wait,” repeated Akulina.

Victor again stretched himself on the ground and began to whistle.
Akulina kept looking at him steadfastly. I could see that she was
growing agitated by degrees--her lips twitched, her pale cheeks were
reddening.

“Victor Alexandrich,” she said at last in a broken voice, “it’s a sin
for you, it’s a sin, Victor Alexandrich, by God!”

“What’s a sin?” he asked, knitting his brows. He raised his head and
turned to her.

“It’s a sin, Victor Alexandrich. If you would only say a good word to me
before leaving--if you would only say one word to me, miserable little
orphan that I am:--”

“But what shall I say to you?”

“I don’t know. You know better than I do, Victor Alexandrich. Here you
are going away--if you would only say one word--What have I done to
deserve this?”

“How strange you are! What can I say?”

“If only one word--”

“There she’s firing away one and the same thing,” he muttered with
vexation, and got up.

“Don’t be angry, Victor Alexandrich,” she added hastily, unable to
repress her tears.

“I’m not angry--only you are foolish--What do you want? I can’t marry
you! I can’t, can I? Well, then, what do you want? What?” He stared at
her, as if awaiting an answer, and opened his fingers wide.

“I want nothing--nothing,” she replied, stammering, not daring to
outstretch her trembling hands to him, “but simply so, at least one
word, at parting--”

And the tears began to stream from her eyes.

“Well, there you are, she’s started crying,” said Victor indifferently,
pulling the cap over his eyes.

“I don’t want anything,” she went on, sobbing and covering her face with
her hands; “but how will I feel now at home, how will I feel? And what
will become of me, what will become of me, wretched one that I am?
They’ll marry the poor little orphan off to a man she does not like. My
poor little head!”

“Keep on singing, keep on singing,” muttered Victor in a low voice,
stirring restlessly.

“If you only said one word, just one: ‘Akulina--I--’”

Sudden heartrending sobs interrupted her. She fell with her face upon
the grass and cried bitterly, bitterly--All her body shook convulsively,
the back of her neck seemed to rise--The long-suppressed sorrow at last
burst forth in a stream of tears. Victor stood a while near her, then he
shrugged his shoulders, turned around and walked off with large steps.

A few moments went by. She grew silent, lifted her head, looked around
and clasped her hands; she was about to run after him, but her feet
failed her--she fell down on her knees. I could not endure it any longer
and rushed over to her; but before she had time to look at me, she
suddenly seemed to have regained her strength--and with a faint cry she
rose and disappeared behind the trees, leaving the scattered flowers on
the ground.

I stood a while, picked up the bunch of cornflowers, and walked out of
the grove to the field, The sun was low in the pale, clear sky; its
rays seemed to have faded and turned cold; they did not shine now, they
spread in an even, almost watery, light. There was only a half-hour left
until evening, and twilight was setting in. A violent wind was blowing
fast toward me across the yellow, dried-up stubble-field; the small
withered leaves were carried quickly past me across the road; the side
of the grove which stood like a wall by the field trembled and flashed
clearly, but not brightly; everywhere on the reddish grass, on the
blades, and the straw, innumerable autumn cobwebs flashed and trembled.
I stopped. I began to feel sad; it seemed a dismal fear of approaching
winter was stealing through the gay, though fresh, smile of fading
nature. High above me, a cautious raven flew by, heavily and sharply
cutting the air with his wings; then he turned his head, looked at me
sidewise, and, croaking abruptly, disappeared beyond the forest; a large
flock of pigeons rushed past me from a barn, and, suddenly whirling
about in a column, they came down and stationed themselves bustlingly
upon the field--a sign of spring autumn! Somebody rode by beyond the
bare hillock, making much noise with an empty wagon.

I returned home, but the image of poor Akulina did not leave my mind for
a long time, and the cornflowers, long withered, are in my possession to
this day.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rendezvous, by Ivan Turgenev

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RENDEZVOUS ***

***** This file should be named 23056-0.txt or 23056-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/0/5/23056/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
